Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

ADDRESS AT LUNCHEON OF
THE COMMONWEALTH CLUB OF CALIFORNIA
IN SAN FRANCISCO, CALIFORNIA, JULY 27, 1951*

BY
MARftlNER S. ECCLES
OF
OGDEN, UTAH

FOR RELEASE WHEN DELIVERED
AT 12;45 P.M., PACIFIC COAST TIME.

THE WAY TO PEACE AND PROSPERITY

It was two years ago last April that I spoke here in San
Francisco to the members and guests of the Commonwealth Club. I assure
you it gives me great pleasure to accept your kind invitation to return.
Those of you who heard me in April 19^9 may recall that I
dwelt at some length t
i
pon the factors which challenge the survival of
democratic capitalism. I listed them, in order of their importance, as
the absence of world peace and our failure, except in war or inflation,
to distribute without recurrent depressions, the wealth that our econo­
mic system is capable of creating.
Mistakes of the Past
Having just finished writing my personal reminiscences, which
deal largely with the economic developments of the past seventeen years,
I find myself with a heightened sense of historical perspective.
As I look back upon the record of our development as a nation,
I am impressed, not only by our accomplishments, which have been many,
but also by our mistakes - mistakes which led to two world wars and, in
between, the greatest economic depression in recorded history*
The mistakes of this century have been made at a time when we
have witnessed the greatest technological and scientific progress in all
history. Before World War I we imagined that we could live in a world
apart, that we could have peace and prosperity at home while Western
Europe engaged in a titanic struggle, the outcome of which we could look
upon with a detached neutrality. When late in the day it became clear to
us that our own survival as a free nation might also be at stake we were
willing to throw all we had into the battle under the slogan of making
the world safe for democracy. Then we sank back into what we thought would
be a period of comfortable "normalcy". We talked of an unending era of
an easy peace and abundance. Virtually all the nations of the world
solemnly outlawed war. So sure were we that the world had indeed been
made safe for democracy that the democratic nations disarmed. The few men
of vision, like Churchill, who warned of the gathering storm went unheeded.
The new era of prosperity collapsed with a suddenness and a com­
pleteness that few foresaw. Mr. Hoover complained, not without justifi­
cation, that the Jeremiahs, the prophets of disaster, only appeared after
the event. We were as bewildered by the causes of this greatest of all
depressions as we were undecided what to do about it. The watchword of
that day was "balance the budget and restore confidence", an empty and
since exploded concept if ever there was one. When Hitler plunged the
world into another vast conflict we were still a divided nation, preponder­
antly believing, or at least hoping, that we could again stand aside and

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

- 2 have business as usual at home while most of the rest of the world fought
to the finish. We had not even then learned how to conquer the problem
of unemployment, how to distribute the abundance that our industrial,
technological, as well as agricultural, skills could produce. There were
some 10 millions seeking work while we were still at peace. Men spoke of
the paradox of poverty in the midst of plenty. And today's paradox is
that huge defense expenditures appear the only cure for mass unemployment
and industrial stagnation.
Reasons for Our Failures
The common fault and cause of these failures of the past lies
not in our democratic institutions, not in our ability to produce and dis­
tribute goods, but in our thinking. The failure is not due, as yet, to
insufficient material resources or to any lack of scientific and inventive
genius in the world; it is due to our inability to deal with the basic
causes of political and social upheavals abroad that lead to war, in which
we inevitably become involved, and to our failures at home to find any
answer, except war or preparation for war, to the problem of distributing
our abundance which is so coveted by the communist world. It is easy to
blame our democratic, political institutions but I venture to say the
trouble lies not so much with these institutions as in our failure to adapt
these institutions to the needs of the modern world. Our economic think­
ing has not kept pace with material and scientific progress. Our thinking
about world problems still seems to me to be too unrealistic. We are too
prodigal in diverting our human and material resources to military pre­
parations for war and defense, and too conservative about using them to
alleviate human misery on which communism and aggression both feed. After
World War II, as after World War I, the democratic nations were in a posi­
tion to establish the foundations for a durable peace and they have failed
miserably to do so. The paradoxes to which I have referred are paradoxes
only because we have not been able to think and then act intelligently in
the light of experience and the cold facts of realities in the world today.
All I can say is that we won't solve them wisely unless we think
about them more realistically than we have during the past few decades.
Some years ago I was asked whether I did not believe that public officials
should have more time to think, and in reply I said:
"I have known a good many men who think they think but who,
for the most part, are merely echoing opinions or prejudices
they have heard over the luncheon table or with which they have
grown up. Or they parrot the customary talk of the trade or
occupation they happen to be in.
"In Government particularly those in positions of great
responsibility ought to have a comprehensive understanding not
merely of their own department or specialty, but pf the entire
economic and political scene at home and abroad if they are to
make intelligent policy decisions. Few men in public life have
anything like a global view of affairs.
Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

- 3 "It is not enough just to organize one's time in order to
be free to think. You have to know how to think, how to assemble
and relate facts, which are so often elusive. And then if the
thinking is to amount to anything, there must be character and
courage, the willingness to make decisions and to make enemies,
and to face inevitable opposition."
There is a growing cynicism in the world today, expecially among
the young people - cynicism resulting from the human failures which have
lead to the tragic conditions existing throughout the world. I noted in
a recent New York Times book review the comment that some contemporary
authors contend that "life has no discernible direction or purpose, that
ideals are illusions, that common values have disappeared, and that a
sensitive person is bound to be destroyed or corrupted in a modern society
in which common values have disappeared". Having frankly admitted that
our generation has made many mistakes, I still say from my own personal
experience that life has both discernible direction and purpose, that
ideals are not illusions, that common values have not disappeared, and
that a sensitive person need not be destroyed or corrupted by modern
society. Those of us who view the present and future with cynicism must
strive to regain a proper perspective. We must not let the events of the
moment obscure the illustrious record of the progress of civilization.
We must not, as Tennyson once wrote, let "the hills of time shut out the
mountains of eternity".
Notwithstanding our mistakes our nation has flourished and our
free enterprise system of democracy has provided us with by far the highest
standard of living of any nation on earth. Unlike some countries that I
could name, where the rich have been getting richer and the poor have been
poorer, our own development during the past two decades has been just the
opposite. We have gone far toward bringing about a more equitable dis­
tribution, than was the case 20 years ago, of the goods and services which
we as a nation can produce. In 1929 the highest 5 per cent of all income
recipients obtained 3^ per cent of the total national income, while, at
the present time, they receive but 18 per cent of the total. Meanwhile
the share of total income received by those in the lower income classes
has increased proportionately. This means that we have in the years
since 1929» accomplished one of the great social revolutions of history,
a revolution that has developed gradually and has been, and will continue
to be of great benefit to our entire nation.
The fact that such a redistribution of income has been effected
without social unrest and upheaval or dislocation of our productive
activities is in itself an eloquent testimonial to our economic, social,
and political institutions.

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

-

k -

Failures of Democratic Capitalism Abroad
While recognizing and paying tribute to the advantages of our
type of society, we must not lose sight of its shortcomings and failures,
particularly in its relationship to other nations of the world. We have
talked loudly in foreign capitals about the advantages of democratic
capitalism, but we have failed to convince our foreign listeners by our
action. Take, for example, the serious situation in Iran, which could
touch off another world war. An authority, commenting upon this situation,
recently said:
"Unfortunately, as things balance up for the Iranians,
the possible economic consequences of their actions do not
weigh very heavily. They do not feel they have much to lose.
This is the West's great failure. Once-proud Persia is a
poor, backward, stagnant, feudal land, haphazardly governed
by a few rich families. Here resentments, deep and bitter,
are compounded by religious antagonism. They lead, inevi­
tably, to a rabid nationalist sentiment, subscribed to alike
by the political right and left. Iran is a classic example
of the colonial area which capitalism has left rotten ripe
for communism. The British and ourselves have talked a lot
about helping to improve the lot of the average Iranian.
Talk is about as far as it has gone."
In Iran, China, Korea, Indo-China and elsewhere we and the other
countries of the Western World have failed singularly to provide the
tangible benefits of democratic capitalism that would have averted the
spread of communism. Instead, we have given our blessing and backing to
reactionary governments that lack the confidence and support of the people.
We have failed to realize that a large part of the world is in a state of
economic revolution which we view as communist inspired and try to buy off
with dollars or settle through war. We must recognize that the communists
can only exploit the conditions that will continue to exist unless we
ourselves, in our foreign policy, deal with the underlying causes of
world-wide revolution. As Supreme Court Justice Douglas has said:
"American foreign policy never has been addressed to
the conditions under which these revolutions flourish. We
send technical experts to help in seed selection, soil con­
servation, malaria controls and the like. But we never
raise our voices for reforms of the vicious tenancy system
........ under which increased production works to the
benefit of a few. We talk about democracy and justice, and
at the same time we support regimes in those countries whose
object is to keep both democracy and justice out of reach
of the peasants for all time."
Democratic capitalism, if it is to survive, must hold its own
against communism, by works rather than by words, in the undeveloped
backward areas of the world. Talking alone will not win many converts
to the democratic cause - only by bringing them the tangible benefits
Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

- 5 -

of increased agricultural and industrial production, more efficient
methods of distribution, and greater equality of income can we expect
the underprivileged masses of the world to forsake the glittering but
never fulfilled promises of communism. Those who complain that the
cost of such a program would be exorbitant must remember that we never
hesitate to spend for war or defense whatever may be necessary, but we
become relatively tight-fisted in our civilian expenditures for main­
taining the peace of the world. This country alone spent over 400 billion
dollars to win World War II, and is now embarked on a defense program that
will cost 50 to 60 billion dollars a year for an indefinite period of time.
Yet, wars never solve any of the world’s problems, but only accentuate
them. Will the world never learn, before it is too late, to use the
resources that are wasted on war or defense against war for the benefit
of the people of the world in an effort to eradicate the basic causes of
war and the need for defense?
In addition to finding ways and means for sharing the material
benefits as well as the ideals of democracy with the other nations of
the world, we must face up to what is perhaps the most fundamental pro­
blem of all - over-population. As biologist, Julian Huxley, has said
"human population is probably the greatest problem of our time . . .
we need a positive population policy for the world as a whole and for
each of the nations in it. Such a population policy will be in the highest
degree moral, in stressing the wickedness of allowing future generations
to be born in increasing misery and permitting the entire race to suffer
genetic degeneration."
We cannot hope to improve the lot of the common man in China,
India or any of the other over-crowded and under-developed nations of the
world if the only check on the number of their inhabitants is the avail­
ability of food. Even Japan and Italy, despite their intensive agricul­
tural and industrial development, could fall prey to communist penetration
and eventual domination if the pressure of their expanding populations
on their limited resources are permitted to result in continued deteriora­
tion of the standard of living of their people. The existence of large
masses of people subsisting at starvation levels is an open invitation to
revolution and communism, since most people will try to fight their way
out of a bad situation before they will willingly starve to death. Such
improvements in the standard of living as the democratic system of produc­
tion and distribution of the western world might provide, would, in the
absence of a positive population policy, quickly be dissipated among the
rapidly increasing numbers of people. Even in our own country we may well
be facing in time a serious problem of over-population if our present rate
of population growth continues. At that rate the United States alone would
have, within 150 years, more people than the present population of the
entire earth.
The two basic causes of world conflict - rapidly growing popu­
lation and consequent inadequacy of the means of production and distribution
necessary to feed and clothe such numbers of people - must be dealt with
realistically in many areas of the earth if peace is to be established and
Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

- 6 -

maintained. Misguided idealism must not be allowed to obscure the need
for hard-headed realism in dealing with the basic causes of war. While
we have adapted the laws of nature to serve our own ends in the realm
of the physical sciences, we have chosen to ignore or neglect suda adap­
tation in the social sciences. It has been said: "We live in a Universe
which stands for no nonsense from anyone and which orders us to play not
the fool but the man in solving our problems."
How Do We Avoid a Third World War?
Some of you may recall my statement from two years ago that "it
has seemed with increasing clarity to me that the best way to avoid
ultimate war, the best hope of peace in our time, is to confront the
Soviets with the decisions which will lay the foundations and the condi­
tions of lasting peace while we have the strength to do so."
By now it has become fairly obvious that we did procrastinate
and did postpone getting a satisfactory settlement with Russia while we
had the opportunity, a settlement that would have brought about a condition
of peace in the world. Instead of enforcing the conditions of peace when
we had the military strength through our monopoly of the atomic bomb to
do so, we have until only recently allowed our own strength to decline
while that of Russia and her satellites haB grown.
Since we failed in the past to remedy the basic causes of
world conflict, or to enforce the conditions of peace, we find ourselves
today confronted with an immediate and pressing need for providing more
adequate national defense in an effort to forestall the outbreak of another
world war. However, we must recognize the fact that our defense prepared­
ness program is at best a temporary and transitional solution - a means of
deterring war while we strive for achievement of a more permanent solution
of the fundamental problems that lead to war. Another global war would
mean total war with atomic and all other weapons of destruction, and likely
could not be won by anyone; on the contrary, it might well lead to the
destruction of civilization itself. I believe that the people of the
world, including the Russian masses, are against war, because modern war
places every man, woman, and child in the front line of battle, exposing
them to suffering and hardship beyond the limits of human endurance. War­
fare today has obliterated the meaning of space and time - land distances
and ocean barriers no longer afford protection; the whole earth has been
encompassed into a relatively small neighborhood. We must not, therefore,
allow ourselves to think of war as inevitable, for, to quote from a recent
editorial, "out of another war would come such an abomination of destruc­
tion and annihilation, such a desolate aftermath of woe and upheaval, such
sorrow and revulsion everywhere that the only happy people would be the
dead people."
We must be resolute in our determination to prevent war; we must
design and carry out a defense preparedness and foreign aid program which
will deter the Russian leaders from starting a third World War.
In doing
so we must choose pur strategy and weapons of defense carefully with an
eye upon their cost as well as their effectiveness, in order that we do
Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

- 7 not destroy the very system our program is designed to protect. This
can happen by permitting further deterioration in the purchasing power of
the dollar and weakening our defenses by squandering our resources of man­
power and materials.
This means a program which we are able and willing to pay for
currently, since it must be sustainable for an indefinite period of time.
The Kremlin's hope, of course, is that through our failure to control
inflation we will accomplish the destruction of our own economic and
political system and make the communist conquest of the United States both
cheap and easy, just as inflation paved the way for Hitler's rise to
power in Germany. From a political standpoint, inflation that leads to
economic bankruptcy is the most powerful instrument of communist infiltration.
In order to utilize our resources of manpower and material most
effectively we should rely primarily upon overwhelming control of the air
and the sea for the purpose of deterring communist aggression, and we
should conserve our manpower for use where it is most effective - in our
production lines. We cannot afford to become further embroiled with land
armies on the continent of Europe or Asia. We should recognize the facts
that our unrivalled productive capacity is our strongest line of defense,
that our ability to produce is largely determined by our available manpower,
and that our country is the arsenal and keystone of the free nations of
the world.
Conclusion
I have sought to pose the great, the inescapable problems, as
I see them, which are a challenge to our best thought and our character as
a nation today. We can defeat ourselves by cynicism, by faintheartedness,
and by failure to think clearly and boldly. We can succeed if we will have
the courage, the character, the unconquerable spirit and the vision which
inspired the forefathers of our nation. Your forebears who came to these
mountains and valleys in their covered wagons and created from the desert
wastelands this fertile and prosperous State did not waver in the face of
danger and difficulty. In the founding of their nation and the extension
of its frontiers, our people overcame obstacles which loomed quite as
large then as those with which we are confronted now. We would do well
today to remember what St. Paul said to the Romans:
"We glory in tribulations; knowing that tribulation
worketh patience; and patience, experience; and experience,
hope." (Romans 5? 3-^)
The great playwright, Robert Sherwood, in commenting on this quotation, had
this to say:
"After the outbreak of the Second World War - after
the Nazis invaded Poland and the Red Army invaded Finland I quoted those words of St. Paul's and Alfred Lunt spoke
them in the play, 'There Shall Be No Night.' Those were
Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

- 8 -

times of tribulation indeed, and far worse tribulations
were soon to come, and those words were given supreme
tests. But there were men of faith - men who could say,
'I have nothing to offer but blood, toil, tears and sweat,'
or 'The only thing we have to fear is fear itself* - and
this patience bred experience, and experience bred hope
and eventual victory.
"Again we are in times of (great) tribulation.
"We should do well to remember that St. Paul's words
of eternal reassurance are still available to men and women
of (vision and) faith."

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

