BOARD OF GOVERNORS
OP THE
FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
For release upon delivery

March 8, 19U6

STATEMENT OF MARRINER S. ECCLES, CHAI R
t
v
I
A
N OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE
FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM, BEFORE THE BANKING AND CURRENCY COMMITTEE OF THE SENATE,.
MARCH 8,19l;6, ON THE FINANCIAL AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES AND GREAT BRITAIN
Mr. Chairman, I appreciate this opportunity to appear before this
Committee to express my views on the proposed British loan. I learned
about the British problem the hard way -r by weeks of continuous negotiations in which we thoroughly explored the British situation and every pro-*
posal for dealing with it, I should like to summarize my conclusions by
offering answers to three questions:
1. "Why do the British need our help?
2. What would it cost us to give this help?
3» What would we get in return?
First: Why do the British need our help?
They need it because they have just finished an exhausting war
against our common enemies. They need a blood transfusion to help them regain their international economic health. The proposed credit is not and,
therefore, should not be judged as a commercial loan.« It is more like a
draft on a blood bank.
Why has the war left Britain in this anemic state? Because in
their extremity the British threw all their resources into the battle without reckoning the cost in terms of where they would be left after victory*
Domestically, their economy can be readily converted to peacetime purposes.
Internationally, the wartime drains on their resources have reduced them to
the point where their only alternatives are to gain recuperative help from
us or else to attempt recovery through exploitation of the Empire system.
The British Isles are normally a great workshop. The British
people depend for their existence upon large imports of food and raw materials. They need the food to exist. They need the raw materials for
manufacture into the goods which they consume and those they sell abroad.
Only by selling goods and services abroad can they get the dollars necessary in the long run to buy what they need abroad. We, in America, who
live so largely from the resources within our Nation, sometimes forget how
different is the situation of countries which cannot survive without a
large measure of foreign trade.
Britainfs export trade, the main source of her international
earning power, was down to one-third of normal by the end of the war. Why?

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

-

2

-

Because in her wartime partnership with us, it was agreed that she should,
concentrate her efforts on war production while we provided her essential
imports under Lend-Lease. Lend-Lease abruptly ended on V-J Day« Britain's
struggle to rebuild her export trade did not begin until that day, It will
take years for her to rebuild her exports, especially since they must now
rise far above the prewar level to make up for her wartime loss of income
from her overseas investments*
Before the war Britain was one of the greatest creditor countries
in the world, receiving each year close to one billion dollars of net income
from her foreign investments. The necessities of war compelled her to
liquidate a large part of her foreign investments and to incur, in the form
of frozen sterling balances, foreign obligations amounting to approximately
12 billion dollars. As a result, her net income from foreign investments
has been reduced to about I4OO million dollars. Not only has she lost this
income, but she has lost liquid assets which might otherwise have been available to tide her over this postwar situation*
This, in brief, is why the British seek our help. There is nowhere else they can turn to get the help which they need in addition to
what they can get from within the Empire.
Second: What would it cost us to give this help?
We are asked to provide a line of credit of $3,750,000#000 to be
drawn over a period of from three to five years. The British wanted, and
made a strong case for much more. The American negotiators, however, were
not willing to ask the Congress to provide more than we concluded was the
irreducible minimum needed to do the job, having in mind (l) Britainfs
urgent requirements for foreign goods, based on continuation of an austere
standard of living, for her people, (2) her capacity to pay out of her own
resources, and (3) the amount of help she might obtain from countries other
than the United States.
What does a loan of $3,750,000,000 cost the United States? The
interest rate which our Government has to pay on borrowed money is not the
important matter that some have tried to make it seem. The real question
is the strain on our financial and economic resources. That involves a
real cost* I scarcely need remind you that we, too, have inherited troubles
from the war. We have a national debt of nearly 280 billion dollars. We
still face dangerous inflationary pressures because of the excessive purchasing power created as a result of the way in which we financed the war
and because of our great shortages of goods relative to this purchasing
power. The expenditure in our markets of dollars provided under this loan
would admittedly add further inflationary pressures to our economy at this
time*

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

-

3

-

Fortunately the added pressures would not be as heavy as they
might seem at first sight. Expenditure of the dollars provided in this
proposed loan would be spread out over several years. Some of the dollars
would be spent initially in other countries and might take some time to
find their way back to our markets. Some would be spent on commodities
which are not in short supply. And unless we bog down in the management
of our own affairs at home, our vast capacity to produce goods will progressively overcome the shortages during the life of this extension of
credit.
It was neither practical nor desirable to attempt to specify as
a condition of the loan how, or when, or for what the dollars should be
spent in our markets. We already have and should retain the over-all control of exports, through export licenses, whereby we can exert a real
measure of control over the timing and nature of all foreign demands,
whether they arise under this loan or otherwise, that may be made on our
economy during the period of inflationary pressures. However, we shall
have to share with the world some of our scarce resources. This fact has
been recognized in our food program. We shall need to recognize it as it
affects other necessities if we are to help bring about economic and
political stability in the world* This takes me to my third point.
Third; What would we get in return?
Out of this proposed loan, which is an integral part of a far
larger fabric of international arrangements, we expect far more than a
mere financial return. The contract provides for repayment of the principal
and for a moderate rate of interest. But at this juncture in our affairs
we are not looking for loans just for the sake of playing the role of world
banker. Only the most real and urgent reasons, based on our own national
advantage, would justify our incurring the costs of any foreign loan at this
time. If the granting of this British loan does not reasonably promise
lasting benefits and compensations to the United States which far outweigh
the financial considerations involved, the loan should not be made. If I
did not feel that this loan is in the deepest sense in the interest of this
country, I would not be here today recommending that you approve it.
We live today in a sick world. We have yet to attain the objectives of the Atlantic Charter, freedom from want and freedom from fear.
These objectives will never be attained, and our ideals of peace and
democracy cannot long survive if we merely indulge in pious hopes and do
nothing to prevent the world from degenerating into further economic chaos
in the aftermath of the most devastating of all wars.
What are we doing about it? As you know, the American Government
has taken the lead in dramng up treaties of economic peace as the basis for
a stable world order. We have laid down "rules of the game,f for a peaceful
and productive system of world trade and finance, first in the Bretton Woods
Agreements and then in the proposals for an International Trade Organization.
The basic justification for the British loan is that it would enable Britain

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

-

h'

to join with us in making a living reality out of those blueprints for
world recovery and reconstruction*
British interests in this field correspond with our own» No
country has a greater stake in a sound and healthy world trade than Britain^
With the loan, the British will be given the help they need to work out of
their postwar predicament in a peaceful and orderly way* They would open
their markets to the world on a basis of nondiscrimination and receive
access to foreign markets on the same basis» They would be able to make
pounds sterling earned by foreign suppliers of the British market freely
convertible into other currencies so that trade would no longer be
arbitrarily channeled along bilateral lines* They would become part of
a world trading system, which is essential to the maintenance of employment and economic stability in a democratic world»
On the other hand, if we r#fuse the loan, the British would be
forced to make a desperate bid for economic domination in large areas of
the world» They would have to intensify their trade and exchange restrictions, and to resort to every economic device to gain advantage in
world markets and obtain necessary supplies» This would force a large part
of the rest of the world into retaliation along the same lines» As a matter
of self-preservation countries would turin increasingly toward state trading
and barter» The British people would suffer privations ever greater than in
wartime, and no one could say whether freedom and democracy could survive
such conditions there* Along this road lies further totalitarian develop*
ment«
Such a prospect would be profoundly disturbing* If our relations
with the British Empire degenerate into a state of bitter rivalry between
trading blocs¥ can we retain any hope of salvaging a decent peace from the
Wreckage of war? Fa$ed with this situation, we are asked to provide a sum
equal to fifteen days1 co^t of fighting the war» I believe that if we
could afford to g^ive 21 billion dollars of Lend-Lease aid to a partner in
winning the war, we should be able to lend a small fraction of this sum to
secure a partner in winning, the paaoeTTF the war had lasted longer, as
many expected, we would not have hesitated to furnish further ^end-Lease
aid to Britain even though the amount might have far exceeded this loan»
But what-about the risk of default? Of course it exist«» We
cannot faresee the conditions which will prevail aver the rest of this
century and neither this loan agreement nor any of the other economic arrangements into which we now enter can survive a state of world-wide economic
collapse such as we suffered during the Great Depression« But if the world
economy is restored to a healthy basis, the payments on this loan, amounting'
to no more than 2 per cent of Britain's annual expenditures abroad, cannot
be judged burdensome* Let me impress this thought upon you: that our very
purpose in making the loan is to create the conditions in which it can be
repaid»

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

-

5

-

You will have noted that I advocate this loan on its own merits
and primarily as a contribution to world stability. I do not believe in
foreign lending for the sake of creating employment here and exporting unemployment to foreign shores. V
i
e get employment, yes, while the money is
being spent, but the fruits of that employment are lost, to us permanently
if we persist in refusing to take goods and services from foreign countries
to enable them to service and repay their debts. If we desire to maintain
a thriving export business and receive service on our investments abroad,
we must make the exchange of goods And services a two-way street* In the
end, responsibility for making it possible for our debtors to pay is ours,
and ours alone.
The decision is in your hands. It is a fateful one. Without
effective British participation, which is possible only if we lend our aid,
the Bretton Woods institutions cannot fulfill the hopes which we have
placed in them. Without the fulfillment of these hopes for a stable economic order in the world, there is little prospect of success for the
United Nations Organization in its search for political stability and
security. Y/ithout economic or political stability, we can expect only
a continued drift of world affairs toward the catastrophe of a third World
War.
Is there not finally another compensation if we make this loan?
It arises from the American sense of fair play. Are we the sort of people
that would fail to help in an hour of great need a stout-hearted ally
dedicated to the institutions of freedom and democracy
an ally which
once stood alone through the long dark night as the only barrier between
this country and Axis aggression. As we review the past, let's not forget
that while the British owe us much, we also owe them something.

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

