Address of Marriner S. Eccles, Member of the Board
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,
at Banquet of the 17th Biennial Congress of The
Cooperative League of the U.S.A., Sherman Hotel,
Chicago, Illinois, October 12, 1950.

For release upon delivery,
Thursday, October 12, 1950*

One must face today's world and its future with hope but
without too much expectation. Events have moved very rapidly these
past few years. Three years ago, with our sole control of the atomic
bomb and control of the sea and air, we could have enforced a peace
settlement in Russia with little risk of war. Since then Russia and
her satellites have gained enormously in economic and military strength.
The Communist blitz in South Korea has made all of us reshape
our thinking as to the kind of a world we are likely to live in during
the next decade. Fears and uncertainty of war lay in the back of many
of our minds prior to June 25. The events of that day and succeeding
days have brought them sharply to the foreground. Nor will the end of
the war in Korea mean the eud of our present emergency. It has just
begun and means the building up and maintenance of a large military
establishment and helping other countries to do the same for many years
to come.
Two main problems face us in this emergency. First, we must
rapidly build an adequate defense program. Second, we must develop a
tough economic program at home to stop inflation, both of these programs
must be designed and carried out so as to get the maximum efficiency
out of our economy.
AS for the rearmament program, Russian aggression can be
stopped if we call their hand and convince them that we will aggressively resist further tyranny and conquest. This means that (l) we must
utilize all of our resources and labor as effectively as possible;
(2) we must devote as much of our national product to defense expenditures as we can afford; and (3) we must obtain the maximum cooperation
of friendly nations and win the support of neutral nations.
Of equal importance to a rearmament program is an economic
program designed to assure financial stability at nome. Two principal
programs have been advanced in recent months to stop the inflation.
The first involves a comprehensive harness of direct controls including
price and wage fixing and rationing of goods. The second involves functional controls, principally fiscal and credit measures designed to
reduce the volume of purchasing power available to the public and increase the purchasing power of the Government.
Inflation stems from an excess of purchasing power over the
available supply of goods and services. Only by adequate fiscal and
credit measures can such excess be prevented. Direct controls — wage
Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

-2and price fixing, rationing, etc. — do not prevent inflation. They
only conceal and postpone inflationary results of inadequate fiscal and
monetary actions. They deal with symptoms rather than disease itself.
They sugar coat the inflation so that the public's will to accept the
required program is weakened and destroyed.
The cornerstone of functional controls must be based on fiscal measures, principally higher taxes, but also lower nonmilitary spending and an effective debt-management policy, A prolonged period of defense preparedness like the one we face must be financed on a pay-asyou-go basis if the purchasing power of the dollar is not to depreciate
further. This involves not only very high taxes but much greater efficiency and economy in the spending of public money as well as the
closing of all of the tax loopholes and an enforced collection of all
of the taxes due the Government.
An adequate tax program must be combined with a restrictive
monetary and credit program if a functional economic stabilization program is to work in stopping inflation. People must not be allowed to
bolster, through additional borrowing, their spendable incomes that have
been reduced by higher taxes. Likewise wages and salaries should not be
increased to offset increased taxation because they are either added to
prices and make for inflation, or they are deducted from profits and
thereby reduce the Government's needed tax revenue and defeat a pay-asyou-go policy. However, it would be difficult, if not impossible, to
adopt the needed restrictive monetary and credit policy for the public
if the Government runs large deficits instead of adopting a pay-asyou-go fiscal policy.
Basically, monetary and credit controls are needed to stop
the growth of bank credit. This is the source of the money supply which
is already excessive and therefore the basis of inflation. This cannot
be done voluntarily by nearly 15,000 competitive banks. Therefore, the
Federal Reserve should be free to use such powers as it has and be given
adequate additional authority to use if necessary to stop further credit
inflation.
A tough program of fiscal and credit measures is an absolute
essential for an effective economic stabilization program in the current
situation. However, it must be accompanied by a limited number of selective direct controls, such as those on certain scarce materials and
facilities and a vigorous program to induce people to save, A large volume
of new savings by individuals and businesses is required to finance the
capital goods and housing needs of a growing economy. However, they
should not be expected to do this without assurance that the future purchasing power of the dollar will be protected. It has already been permitted to depreciate far too much in its value. The dollar is worth
but 58 cents in purchasing power today as compared to ten years ago.

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

-3If a broad and strong functional economic control program is
not adopted promptly and put into effect vigorously, either the inflationary spiral is bound to continue or without question it will be necessary to impose a straight-jacket of objectionable direct controls and
restrictions. Either development would be calamitous.
Inflation injures most those least able to bear injury. It
strikes at the core of democratic capitalism* It destroys the strength
and moving force of our economic system. It must be stopped. An extensive system of direct controls would not only seriously impair the
functioning of our economic system but would also lead to the weakening
and eventual destruction of the very foundation of social and economic
life that we are seeking to preserve in our defense against fiussian
Communism*

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

