MONETARY PROBLEMS OF RECOVERY

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

ADDRESS OF

MARRINER S. ECCLES
GOVERNOR OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD
BEFORE THE

ANNUAL MIDWINTER MEETING OF THE OHIO BANKERS
ASSOCIATION, AT COLUMBUS, OHIO
FEBRUARY 12, 1935

PRINTED IN THE CONGRESSIONAL RECORD OF
FEBRUARY 14, 1935, BY REQUEST OF

HON. DUNCAN U. FLETCHER
OF FLORIDA

UNITED STATES
GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
WASHINGTON: 1935

ADDRESS OF MARRINER S. ECCLES
Mr. FLETCHER. Mr. President, on the 12th of February Mr. Marriner S. Eccles, Governor
of the Federal Reserve Board, delivered to the Ohio Bankers Association a very interesting
address bearing directly upon pending legislation. I ask to have it inserted in the Congressional
Record.
There being no objection, the address was ordered to be printed in the Record, as follows:
Mr. ECCLES. I am grateful for this opportunity to address the members of the State
Bankers Association of Ohio and their friends
who have joined them on this occasion.
In taking up my duties in Washington,
first with the Treasury and then with the
Federal Reserve Board, I was, of course,
under the necessity of resigning my own
banking connections. Nevertheless I have
every reason to feel entirely at home in an
assembly of bankers, and I am genuinely glad
to be here. This is, in fact, the first opportunity I have had to address a large number of
bankers since I became Governor of the Federal
Reserve Board.
When I accepted the invitation I received
from your president in December, I was somewhat at a loss to decide what subject to discuss
with you. Since then the banking bill of 1935
has been introduced and I feel sure that there
is no subject in which bankers will be more
interested than the provisions of that bill.
I am especially glad to be able to present to you
my conception of the objectives of this measure,
because I believe that all who are of the banking
fraternity, no less than those of us who are
identified with the administration in Washington, have every reason of common interest
and common purpose to desire the solution of
the monetary problems of recovery in the
manner in which the banking bill of 1935
seeks to solve them.
But it is not my intention this afternoon to
go into a detailed discussion of each provision of
the bill. There will be ample opportunity

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

117809—35

(

for that on other occasions. I propose this
afternoon, rather, to discuss the general
philosophy underlying the bill as a whole. I
have chosen this method of approach because I
believe that it will enable you to appreciate
more fully the significance that we attach to
its various provisions, and the result that we
hope to accomplish through their practical
operation.
Broadly speaking, there are four main objects
which we seek to accomplish. In the first
place, we wish to make the banking system a
more efficient instrument for the promotion of
stable business conditions in the future; secondly, various proposals in the bill are designed
to bring our banking system into closer conformity with modern conditions and, more immediately, to aid in business recovery; thirdly,
we seek to make certain rather fundamental
changes in the law relating to deposit insurance
in order to make the system sounder and more
equitable; and, finally, we seek to correct
various inequalities, ambiguities, and abuses
that have developed in the banking system in
the course of time. In the limited time at my
disposal I shall have to confine myself to a discussion of the broad principles behind the proposals which are designed to secure the first two
objectives mentioned, stability and recovery.
How may our banking system be so regulated
and adapted that it may become a more efficient
instrument for the promotion of business stability and the mitigation of industrial fluctuations? A complete answer to this question
demands much fuller treatment that I can

possibly give it here. Book after book has
been written on this subject. Because of the
need for brevity I fear the statement of my
views may appear to be dogmatic. I shall,
however, have to run this risk, as I feel that
in no other way can I indicate to you the significance I attach to the various proposals.
The fundamental premise underlying the bill
and underlying my discussion this afternoon is
that business stability is a desirable objective.
I feel sure that no one will disagree with this
premise and to my way of thinking agreement
on this one vital point alone will lead you to
lend your whole-hearted support to the banking
bill of 1935.
The second fundamental premise upon which
I proceed is that business stability cannot be
achieved without real thought, real effort, and
real courage. To establish this point it is not
necessary to accept and defend any one single
explanation of the business cycle. I t is merely
necessary to call to mind that in the heyday of
laissez faire, before any attempts at conscious
control were undertaken, business fluctuations
on a disastrous scale occurred with distressing
regularity. If we had a perfectly flexible cost
and price structure—which would have to
include, I may remind you, an equally flexible
wage and interest structure—our economy
could probably adjust itself to rapid expansions
and contractions with little resultant unemployment. Without such flexibility, however,
expansion and contraction, instead of calling
into play forces that adjust and correct such
movements, tend to feed upon themselves and
for a considerable period to generate further
expansions and contractions.
I t is not realistic, however, to say that all
that is necessary is to introduce more flexibility into our system. Numerous rigidities
and inflexibilities have developed in our
economy, and the trend in the recent past
plainly points to more rather than less rigidity
in the future. If there is one thing that to me
seems clear, it is that, unless conscious effort
is made to prevent them, booms and collapses
will continue to recur in capitalistic democracies. I t also seems evident to me that neither
capitalism nor democracy can survive another

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

depression of the magnitude of the one from
which we are just emerging.
Proceeding, then, on the assumption t h a t
business stability is a desirable, nay, a necessary objective which cannot be achieved without conscious effort, I wish to develop the thesis
that the banking system can and should be one
of our chief instruments for the promotion of
stability.
The first elementary principle which it is
essential to grasp and which it is not necessary
for me to expand upon is that the bulk of our
money supply today is composed of deposits
subject to check. Out of a total volume of
$24,000,000,000 of money, or units of purchasing power, nearly $19,000,000,000 is composed
of checking accounts in commercial banks.
The second general principle in the theory of
monetary control is that variations in the community's supply of money have an effect on the
state of business activity There is no general
agreement as to the extent or nature of the
effect such variations have on business conditions. If I presume, as a layman, to enter this
controversial field, it is because I feel that the
question " W h a t effect have variations in the
supply of money on business conditions ? " cannot be answered in general terms or in a dogmatic manner. The effect depends on a large
number of circumstances. Thus, at certain
times an increase or decrease of 5 percent in the
money supply may modify substantially the
course of business. At other times the effect
of a variation of 20 percent may be barely discernible. One point on which I think there is
general agreement, and the only point which it
is necessary for me to make here, is that increases in the money supply tend to stimulate
business activity while decreases in the money
supply tend to restrict activity.
The third principle in my general thesis of
monetary control is that the operation of the
banking system left to itself with no conscious
effort of control tends to intensify rather than
to counteract business fluctuations. The sequence of events may be briefly outlined.
When business activity is increasing, there is
an increased demand for bank loans and a
growing disposition among banks to loan

3
liberally. When banks lend more, thus increasing their assets, they also increase their deposits.
Consequently, at the very time when the
community i s increasing its expenditures, there
is a tendency for the supply of money to increase. Similarly, when expenditures are decreasing, the demand for bank loans falls off,
bankers become more cautious, maturing loans
are repaid, and deposits are extinguished.
Our banking system, therefore, not only fails
to act as a compensatory agent, but actually
intensifies fluctuations. For example, in the
period from 1929 to 1933, when expenditures
were falling rapidly and the national income
was being cut in half, the supply of deposit
money decreased by approximately one-third.
Part of the decrease can be attributed to bank
failures, accentuated by withdrawals of cash
for hoarding, and part to the contraction of
loans and investments by surviving banks.
No one person or body is responsible for this
decline. The responsibility must be shared
by the entire system.
The fact is that laissez faire in banking and
the attainment of business stability are incompatible. If variations in the supply of money
are to be compensatory and corrective rather
than inflammatory and intensifying, there
must be conscious and deliberate control.
The difficult and controversial question is,
Who should do the controlling? I would
gladly follow the course of the worthy divine
who looked a difficulty boldly in the face and
passed it by, but that is not the kind of boldness
that will lead us out of the wilderness. I shall
state, therefore, as my fourth principle that
the controlling or regulatory body must be
one which represents the interests not of any
particular class or group of people but of the
Nation as a whole.
There is no political or economic power more
charged with the general or social interest than
the power to increase or decrease the supply
of money. If the sovereign authority delegates
this power to a particular group or class in the
community, as it has done in large part in this
country, it divests itself of a part of its effective
sovereignty. The purposes of the Nation, as
expressed in its national administration, can be

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

completely nullified by those who control the
money supply.
The theory of a democratic state presupposes
that the will of the majority shall prevail. If
minorities feel that the acts of the majority
make life unbearable, they may try to change
the views of enough voters to change the complexion of the majority, or they may revolt and
try to establish a rule of the minority. If they
succeed in the latter course, the State ceases
to be democratic. Majorities may, and sometimes do, abuse their power. I t is necessary
to remind ourselves, however, that so long
as we remain a democracy the will of the
majority is expected to prevail in monetary
policy as well as in other matters of national
concern.
I t is my personal conviction that our system
of broad political representation, faulty as it
may be, constitutes a better guarantee that the
general interest will be served than would control by a group of individuals chosen, let us
say, entirely by bankers or business leaders.
The power to coin money and to regulate the
value thereof has always been an attribute of a
sovereign power. I t was one of the first powers
given to the Federal Government by the Constitutional Convention. The development of
deposit banking, however, introduced into the
economy numerous private agencies which have
the power to create and destroy money without
being aware of it themselves and without being
recognized as creators or destroyers of money
by the Government or the people. The trend
since 1913 represents a gradual recognition of
this condition and a reassertion by the State
of a power which it always possessed.
The President stated the underlying principles controlling the relation of the Government
and the banks last October in his speech before
the American Bankers Association. He then
remarked that "the old fallacious notion of the
bankers on the one side and the Government on
the other as a more or less equal and independent units has passed away. Government by
the necessity of things must be the leader, must
be the judge of the conflicting interests of all
groups in the community, including bankers.
The Government is the outward expression of

4
the common life of all citizens." That, I think, I
expresses the matter very effectively.
I am here merely stating the broad principles
involved. I shall not like to be understood
as arguing for a highly centralized control of
all banking activities. Local versus national
control is not a subject on which one should
take sides irrespective of the question at hand.
The administration of certain interests can
obviously be handled more efficiently locally.
Similarly, there are other things which can be
handled more efficiently on a national scale.
We should consider each case on its merits and
provide for local control or national control,
whichever is in the public interest. Let us
now apply this principle to banking.
Banks in this country perform two main
services. They act as middlemen for the investment of a substantial portion of the community's savings, and, through the provision of
checking facilities, they supply the bulk of the
community's means of payment. So far as the
investment of savings is concerned, a large
degree of local autonomy should be left with
the individual bankers. The State should lay
down minimum standards to be observed in
the interests of protecting savings of individuals, but these standards can only be minima,
and chief reliance for the safe investment of
the community's savings must rest on the
judgment and knowledge of the individual
banker.
When we come to the second function of
banks—namely, that of providing the community's money supply—a different range of
factors must be taken into consideration. The
effect of variations in the supply of money is
Nation-wide and cannot be localized. The
Reserve administration may make conditions
favorable for the creation of new deposits, but
it cannot insure that the new money will be
used in any particular section of the country,
or spent on any particular kind of goods.
Since, therefore, the effect of monetary policy
is Nation-wide, the formulation of monetary
policy should be by a body which represents
the Nation, and which is activated by national
considerations. I t is inconceivable that variations in the community's money supply

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

should be left to the individual decisions of
some 15 thousand local bankers. I t is scarcely
more logical that the variations should reflect
uncoordinated decisions of the 12 Federal
Reserve banks.
I t may be helpful if I here summarize the
various steps in my argument to this point.
M y fundamental premise is that business
stability is a desirable objective which it is
worth making every effort to achieve. Variation in the supply of money, which in this
country is furnished largely by our commercial
banks in the form of checking accounts, influence business activity to an unknown degree
but in a known direction. The banking system, left to itself, behaves in an intensifying
rather than a compensatory fashion. If it is
to be made to behave in a compensatory
fashion, there must be conscious and deliberate
control, and this control must be exercised by
a body which represents the Nation.
Let us now examine the Federal Reserve
System in the light of the preceding discussion.
I propose, first, to discuss the development of
open-market policy.
In 1913 the framers of the Federal Reserve
Act had certain definite purposes in mind which
did not iuelude, as the bill was enacted, any
reference to national monetary policy. They
wished to prevent the periodic suspension of
payments which occurred under the old national-banking system, and to provide an
agency where banks could rediscount commercial loans in order to supply temporary, seasonal, and emergency needs of their customers
for credit and currency. Broadly speaking,
I think it is true to say that the Reserve banks
were looked upon as emergency lending institutions. From this viewpoint it was proper
that the regional Reserve banks should have
almost complete autonomy, and that the Federal Reserve Board should have only a limited
amount of supervisory and coordinating power.
I n the post-war period our concept of the
functions of the Reserve administration gradually changed. I t became evident that through
the control of the reserves of member banks
the Reserve administration could influence the
volume of deposits, and hence the volume of

5
loanable funds of commercial banks. The
trend away from autonomous regional action
to a more coordinated and centralized control
was evidenced by a significant development in
1922 and 1923. In 1922 certain of the Reserve banks began to buy securities, mainly
for the purpose of increasing their earning assets.
The purchase of these securities, however, took
place in New York and gave deposits and reserves to New York commercial banks. These
banks utilized these increased reserves to reduce their borrowings from the New York
Federal Reserve Bank. I t appeared, therefore, that the attempt of other Reserve Banks
to increase their earning assets resulted in a
decrease in the earning assets of the New York
Reserve Bank. I t also became evident that
increased or decreased purchases of securities
by the Reserve banks affected member banks'
reserves, and in this way member banks' deposits, and loans and investments. A small
committee of Governors was thereupon set up
to coordinate purchases and sales. In 1923
this committee became the open-market committee, composed of the Governors of the Federal Reserve Banks of New York, Boston,
Philadelphia, Chicago, and Cleveland. Its
stated duty was to formulate open-market
policy, subject to the approval of the Federal
Reserve Board, with primary regard to the
accommodation of commerce and business, and
to the effect of such purchases or sales on the
general credit situation. This marked a step
toward the theory of conscious and continuous
control. From this date onward the volume of
money in the United States was influenced
greatly by actions of the open-market committee and the Federal Reserve Board.
I t appears, therefore, that the System itself
by virtue of necessity has developed a large
measure of coordinated activity in regard to
open-market operations, the single most important instrument of Reserve control. This
coordination, while it represented a great advance over the situation which prevailed up to
1923, nevertheless leaves much to be desired.
The body which is charged with the formulation of open-market policy is the Federal Open
Market Committee, which is composed of the

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

Governors of the 12 Federal Reserve banks.
These Governors are independent of the Federal Reserve Board. After the Open Market
Committee has formulated its policy, its recommendations may be adopted or rejected by
the Federal Reserve Board. Even after the
policy has been formulated by the committee
and approved by the Board, any Federal Reserve bank, through its board of directors, is
free to decline to participate in the policy.
Since you are all administrators, I do not think
that I need spend much time in pointing out to
you how bad this set-up is from an administrative point of view. The body which is ultimately responsible for policy—the Federal
Reserve Board—legally can take no part in
the formulation of the policy. The body
which formulates policy, on the other hand,
legally has no power to bring the policy into
operation. The boards of directors of the individual Reserve banks, who take no part in
the formulation of policy, have the power to
obstruct its operation. I t is a well-known fact
that the more people there are who share a
responsibility for policy, the less keenly does
any one of those people feel his own personal
responsibility.
The theory, therefore, back of the openmarket provision in the recent banking bill
becomes clear. The bill provides for a small,
responsive body which is charged with the duty
of acting in the national interest in formulating
open-market policy and in accepting responsibility for its consummation and results.
You will observe next that we propose to
leave the essentially regional organization of
the Federal Reserve System virtually unchanged. I feel that in a country the size of
ours the regional system of Federal Reserve
banks must always play an important and
necessary role in our banking system. They
afford, for one thing, an essential link between
the thousands of individual member banks, on
the one hand, and the Federal Reserve Board,
on the other. Besides keeping in close touch
with member banks the Reserve banks examine
member banks, admit banks to membership,
provide check-clearing facilities, make loans to
individual member banks, carry the reserves of

6
member banks, and supply the currency needs
of their localities.
Hiere is but one change in the internal organization of the Reserve banks which, in the
interests of economy, efficiency, and coordination, I think it is necessary at this time to
effect. Officially the Federal Reserve Board
has no relations with the governors of the
Reserve banks. In their dealings with the
Reserve banks the Board is supposed to work
through the chairmen, who are not the chief
executive officers of the banks. I t is proposed
to end the dual administration of the Reserve
banks under the chairman of the Board, who
is appointed by the Federal Reserve Board,
and the Governor, who is appointed by the
local board of directors, to give the governors
a legal status and to combine their position
with that of chairmen of their boards of directors. Inasmuch as the Federal Reserve Board
is surrendering the appointment of the chairman, it is obviously desirable in the interests
of coordination and harmony that the appointment of governors by the local boards be
subject to the approval of the Federal Reserve
Board.
In laying down a guiding principle for the
President in his selection of future members of
the Board, it seemed desirable to substitute for
the somewhat meaningless phrases in the law
the unequivocal requirement that the members
should be persons qualified by education and
experience to take part in the formulation of
national economic and monetary policies.
This is a recognition in the law of the principal
function of the Federal Reserve Board.
In view of the enormous difficulty of the
task of the Federal Reserve Board, the bill
attempts to make a position on that Board as
attractive as possible for the purpose of securing and retaining the services of the best talent
in the country. The attractiveness of a position on the Board will be increased by the
added powers granted to it and by providing
that its members shall be relieved as far as
possible from financial worries. A position on
the Board is one of the most important posts
in the Nation, and recognition of this fact is
accorded in the bill.

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

I turn now to proposed changes in the operation of the Federal Reserve banks.
Two of the proposed changes now in the bill
have been widely commented upon and have
been as widely misunderstood. I refer to the
provision that the type of paper eligible for rediscounting at Federal Reserve banks shall not
be defined in the law, but shall be subject to
the regulation of the Federal Reserve Board:
and to the provision that segregation of collateral for Federal Reserve notes shall be repealed.
In order to understand our reasons for wishing to modify the present requirements in the
law relating to eligibility, it is necessary to
recount briefly certain developments that have
occurred in the history of the Federal Reserve
System. Apparently it was the theory of the
framers of the Federal Reserve Act that borrowings on commercial paper from the Reserve
banks and the issue of Federal Reserve notes
would be closely connected. I t was provided,
therefore, that Federal Reserve notes issued by
Federal Reserve agents should be secured by
100-percent collateral in gold or eligible paper
and that Federal Reserve notes in actual circulation shall have a 40-percent reserve in
gold. I t was apparently believed that the
demand for notes arose from commercial borrowers, that the collateral requirements would
restrict the issue of notes to such borrowers,
and that this would afford elasticity and prevent the danger of overissue.
This line of reasoning did not take cognizance
of a profound change in our monetary habits.
In a deposit-using country such as the United
States, currency is seldom borrowed from a
bank. Borrowers normally receive deposit
credits and pay their bills with checks. The
demand for currency arises chiefly from individuals and businesses who for the sake of convenience desire to convert a portion of their
checking accounts into currency. The volume
of money in circulation fluctuates with changes
in the volume of those activities which employ
the largest amount of cash, namely, retail trade
and factory pay rolls. A consequence of this
development is that the Reserve banks play a
passive role in supplying Federal Reserve notes
for circulation. If they issued Federal Reserve

7
notes in payment for securities purchased, the
sellers of the securities would immediately
deposit the notes in the member banks and
the member banks would send them in to the
Reserve banks. If they sold securities for
Federal Reserve notes, the buyers of the
securities would get the notes from their
member banks and these banks in turn would
get them from the Reserve banks.
Thus, it will be seen that the framers of the
Federal Reserve Act were mistaken in two of
their expectations regarding note issue. Notes
are not associated in any direct or immediate
way with the needs of business for commercial
loans. Neither is there any need to place
restrictions on the issue of Federal Reserve
notes since, as we have just seen, the volume
outstanding is not susceptible to control in a
predominantly deposit-using country.
Although the requirements that Federal
Reserve notes be secured by eligible paper or
gold does not serve as a restriction on the
issue of Federal Reserve notes, it may in the
future, as it has in the past, severely restrict
the ability of the Reserve administration to
increase the volume of deposits through openmarket operations. Thus, in 1931 there occurred simultaneously a demand for gold for
export and for notes to hoard. Owing to the
shortage of eligible paper held by the Reserve
banks, more than a billion dollars in gold in
excess of the 40-percent gold requirement had
to be earmarked for the account of Federal
Reserve notes. Had the Reserve banks bought
securities in order to build up member banks
reserves, the rediscounts would have decreased
and more gold would have had to be pledged
against Federal Reserve notes. The Reserve
administration felt at that time that its hands
were tied and that it could take no action to
stem the course of deflation so long as the noteissue provisions remained in the law. The
Glass-Steagall Act of 1932, by making Government securities bought in the open market
eligible as collateral for Federal Reserve notes,
permitted the Reserve Administration to buy
securities, get member banks out of debt, and
thus stem the process of deflation. This act

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

expires this year unless extended by the President for a maximum of 2 more years.
I t is realistic and desirable at this time to
do away with the collateral requirements
altogether. They add nothing to the safety
of the Federal Reserve notes since these notes
are an obligation of the United States Government and have a prior lien on the assets of the
Federal Reserve banks. This does not mean
that notes will be issued without adequate
backing. Any increase in the note issue
must be counterbalanced by a corresponding
increase in Federal Reserve bank assets. I t
makes no change in the requirement for a 40percent reserve in gold certificates or lawful
money. I t is merely a proposal to get rid of
an antiquated feature in the Federal Reserve
Act which has never served a useful purpose
and has in the past at times prevented the
timely launching of an essential monetary
policy.
The restriction of the rediscounting privilege
to a particular and narrowly restricted type of
bank loan is in accordance with a theory of
reserve banking which I think we have now
outgrown. The major task of the Reserve
Administration is not to encourage the extension of a particular type of loan. The restriction of the borrowing privilege to commercial loans has no connection with regulation of the volume of bank credit or of the
access to the Reserve banks. The aggregate
amount of paper eligible for rediscounting has
been at all times greatly in excess of the volume of rediscounts. Moreover, banks have
been permitted to rediscount their own notes
secured by Government obligations. To control the amount of borrowing from Reserve
banks the Reserve Administration relies upon
the rediscount rate and the general policy,
amounting to unwritten law, that borrowing
should not be continuous and should be for
emergency and seasonal purposes only.
Hence, the elimination of technical restrictions on eligibility does not involve any danger
of excessive use of Reserve bank facilities.
But it does enable the Reserve banks to come
to the assistance of banks who may have

8
sound assets but may be devoid of eligible
paper. For the emergency such a provision
was made by the Glass-Steagall Act, but not
until great harm had resulted from the inability of the member banks to receive help
from the Reserve banks in the emergency.
The bill provides for admission of nonmember banks into the Federal Reserve System
prior to 1937 without regard to the size of
their capital. This will enable small banks,
which would otherwise be confronted with the
dilemma of either foregoing the protection of
deposit insurance or promptly raising additional capital, to join the Federal Reserve
System with their present capital, and thus to
become eligible for admission to the insurance
system. The resultant unification of banking
under the Federal Reserve System and the
provision in the bill giving the Federal Reserve Board power to change member bank
reserve requirements will contribute to the
Board's ability to exercise effective monetary
control.
Let us now consider the proposals in the bill
that are designed more specifically to aid in
business recovery. I shall confine my discussion chiefly to the one proposal which I
regard as the most important in this respect
and at the same time the one most susceptible
to misunderstanding. I refer to the provision
permitting banks to make loans on improved
real estate up to 75 percent of its appraised
value and on an amortization basis for a 20year period and
an aggregate amount up to
60 percent of their time deposits.
I t has been asserted that this is an invitation
to banks to make loans of a character that does
not conform to sound banking principles or
standards. The collapse of real-estate values
is cited as an illustration of the dangers associated with such loans. I t is constantly stated
that the troubles of our banking system were
due entirely to the acquisition of long-term
assets by the banks. I t is suggested that banks
in the future should confine themselves to

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

j short-dated commercial loans and investments.
[ But I need not tell you that, if this suggestion
were acted upon, the result would be fatal to
the banks.
I n October 1934 the eligible paper of member
banks, within the meaning of the Federal
Reserve Act, amounted to only slightly more
than $2,000,000,000. No doubt, based upon
your past experience, you would find that a
much smaller amount would be acceptable if it
were offered to the Reserve banks. Even in
1929 this paper amounted to only 4% billion
dollars. Banks cannot live on the interest of
such a small volume of loans and an attempt to
confine themselves to these loans would greatly
curtail the scope of banking. The more business the banks refuse the more will be handled
by other agencies, including the Government,
and the less room will remain for the operations
of the private banking system.
I am fully aware of the fear with which bankers view the extension of other lending agencies
and the uneasiness they feel at having to rely
more and more on holdings of Government
obligations to keep up their income. I might
point out, however, that these developments
are a consequence of the failure of the banking
system to perform its functions adequately.
If the banking system would utilize in realestate loans and other long-term investments
the savings and excess funds that it now possesses, bank business activity would be greatly
stimulated, and the Government would then
be able to withdraw rapidly from the lending
field.
The bankers also feel a deep concern about
the constant growth of the Government's
deficit and of the public debt, and yet a
considerable part of this debt is incurred in
refinancing mortgages and in undertaking
other functions which the banks have failed to
perform. Release of banking funds in these
fields would enable the Government to diminish
its expenditures and to reduce the rate of
growth of the public debt.

I am, you will carefully note, criticizing the
banking system and not the bankers as
individuals. I do not see how you as individual bankers, having to secure liquidity alone
and unaided, could safely have followed a
different lending policy than you did.
This, then, is the dilemma that faces the
banks. If they go into the longer-term lending
business, they run the risk of depreciation and
of inability to realize quickly upon their assets
in case of need. If they do not go into this
business, they cannot find an outlet for their
funds. Their earnings will suffer and the
justification for their existence diminishes.
How can this dilemma be solved? I t is proposed in the bill to solve it by removing the
problem of liquidity as such from the concern
of the banks, by bestowing liquidity on all
sound assets through making them eligible as
a basis of borrowing at the Reserve banks in
case of need. This will enable the banks to
concentrate their effort on keeping their assets
sound and to pay less attention to their form
and maturity.
Reliance on the form of paper as a guide to
soundness and eligibility has not protected the
banking system from disaster. We wish to
divert bankers' attention from the semblance
of paper to its substance; to emphasize soundness, rather than liquidity. To require that a
real-estate loan shall be repaid in 5 years, as
the present law requires, does not even improve
liquidity but rather, through the excessive
strain it places on the borrower, acts to promote
foreclosures and insolvency.
What we are proposing is that the problem
of liquidity shall cease to be an individual concern and shall become the collective concern of
the banking system. A single bank which
adopts a policy calculated to pay off all of its
deposits at a moment's notice, even though the
national income is cut in two, cannot adequately
perform its duty of serving its community.
Since good local loans go bad when a depression sets in, the bank's portfolio would have to

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

consist of super-liquid open-market paper.
What we want to accomplish is to make it
possible for banks, without abandoning prudence or care, to meet local needs both for
short- and for long-time funds. We want to
make all sound assets liquid by making them
rediscountable at the Reserve banks, and then
to use the powers of monetary control in an
attempt to prevent the recurrence of national
conditions which result in radical declines of
national income, in the freezing of all bank
assets whether they are technically in liquid
form or not, and in general unemployment and
destitution. If we can bring this about, then
the banks, as well as all other enterprises, will
be safer than they can ever be under a policy
of each for himself and the devil take the
hindmost.
In conclusion, let me make myself clear that
I do not expect the passage of the banking bill
of 1935 to solve the problem of the business
cycle. What I do expect is that its passage will
make conditions more favorable for its eventual
solution. M y own view is that, while through
the compensatory action of the banking system much can be done to moderate fluctuations,
it will be necessary for the Government also to
help in offsetting and counteracting rapid
expansion and contraction of expenditures on
the part of the community at large. I t can
do this by varying its expenditures and by the
use of the taxing power in securing a better
distribution of income so as to insure employment, thus maintaining the necessary distribution of wealth production as currently produced.
One thing is certain: We will not obtain
stability unless we work for it. A policy of
laissez faire presupposes an economy possessing
a flexibility which I think it is hopeless for us to
expect to achieve. Therefore it is absolutely
essential to develop agencies which by conscious and deliberate compensatory action will
obviate the necessity of drastic downward or
upward adjustments of costs and prices, wages,
and capital structures. If we do not develop

10
such agencies, our present economy, and, perhaps, our present form of government cannot
long survive.
For this reason it behooves all of us, who are
charged with the responsibility of managing our
money and credit mechanism, to devote our
best thought and greatest effort to promote an
intelligent understanding of the monetary and
economic problems confronting the Nation.
By supporting the proposed legislation which

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

I have outlined to you, and, what is even more
important, by cooperating with the policies for
the promotion of which the changes in our banking structure are proposed, the bankers of the
country will be working not only in their own
best interests but also in the interests of
recovery and the establishment, within our
economic and political framework, of a more
stable and equitable national economy.

o

