ADDRESS OF MARRINER S. ECCLES, MEMBER
BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
AT THE
58TH COMMENCEMENT OF THE UTAH STATE AGRICULTURAL COLLEGE, LOGAN, UTAH
For release on delivery

Monday, June 4, 1951.

President Madsen, members of the graduating class, members of the
faculty, distinguished guests: I deeply appreciate the honor of delivering
the Commencement Address at Utah Agricultural College in what for many years
was my home town of Logan. More years ago than I care to admit I was ushered
into this life at the home of my grandmother, which stood at the corner of
Maine and 3rd North. That house is no longer there, but like a traveller
returning to his homeland after a long, interesting, often exciting, sometimes difficult, journey, I am always refreshed and invigorated by the familiar sights and faces that I see about me in Logan.
I accepted the invitation to address you at this Commencement with
the usual misgivings that assail anyone who is supposed to utter words of
wisdom before the younger generation. For my part, the mistakes of my and
preceding generations, which led to two world wars and, in between, the greatest economic depression in recorded history, seem to belie any words of wisdom. For your part, of course, you have little choice except to sit here and
endure the ordeal. I shall not pretend that I can give you words of wisdom,
but I can speak from experience—that hard taskmaster from whom we may at
least learn how to avoid making the same mistakes in the future that we made
in the past.
The mistakes of this century have been made at a time when we have
witnessed the greatest technological and scientific progress in all history.
Before World War I we imagined that we could live in a world apart, that we
could have peace and prosperity at home while Western Europe engaged in a
titanic struggle, the outcome of which we could look upon with a detached
neutrality. When late in the day it became clear to us that our own survival
as a nation may also be at stake we were willing to throw all we had into the
battle under the slogan of making the world safe for democracy. Then we sank
back into what we thought would be a period of comfortable "normalcy". We
talked of an unending era of an easy peace and abundance.
Virtually all the
nations of the world solemnly outlawed war. So sure were we that the world
had indeed been made safe for democracy that the democratic nations disarmed.
The few men of vision, like Churchill, who warned of the gathering storm went
unheeded.
The new era of prosperity collapsed with a suddenness and a completeness that few foresaw. Mr. Hoover complained, not without justification,
that the Jeremiahs, the prophets of disaster, only appeared after the event.
We were as bewildered by the causes of this greatest of all depressions as
we were undecided what to do about it. The watchword of that day was "balance
.the budget and restore confidence", an empty and since exploded concept
if ever there was one. When Hitler plunged the world into another vast conflict we were still a divided nation, preponderantly believing, or at least

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

-2hoping, that we could again stand aside and have business as usual at home
while most of the rest of the world fought to the finish. We had not even
then learned how to conquer the problem of unemployment, how to distribute
the abundance that our industrial, technological, as well as agricultural,
skills could produce. There were some 10 millions seeking work while we
were still at peace. Men spoke of the paradox of poverty in the midst of
plenty. And today1s paradox is that huge defense expenditures appear the
only cure for mass unemployment and industrial stagnation.
The common fault and cause of these failures of the past lies not
in our democratic institutions, not in our ability to produce and distribute
goods, but in our thinking. The failure is not due, as yet, to insufficient
material resources or to any lack of scientific and inventive genius in the
worldj it is due to our inability to deal with the basic causes of political
and social upheavals abroad that lead to war, in which we inevitably become
involved, and to our failures at home to find any answer, except war or preparation for war, to the problem of distributing our abundance which is so
coveted by the communist world. It is easy to blame our democratic, political institutions but I venture to say the trouble lies not so much with
these institutions as in our failure to adapt those institutions to the needs
of the modern world. Our economic thinking has not kept pace with material
and scientific progress. Our thinking about world problems still seems to
me to be too unrealistic. We are too prodigal in diverting our human and
material resources to military preparations for war and defense, and too conservative about using them to alleviate human misery on which communism and
aggression both feed. After World War II, as after World War I, the democratic
nations were in a position to establish the foundations for a durable peace
and they have failed miserably to do so. The paradoxes to which I have referred are paradoxes only because we have not been able to think and then act
intelligently in the light of experience and the cold facts of realities in
the world today.
You are undoubtedly bored with the truism that you will have to
grapple with, and solve, the problems inherited from your elders. All I can
say to you is that you won't solve them wisely unless you think about them
more realistically than has characterized much of our thinking in the past
few decades. Presumably what you have been taught here, above all, is how
to think. Some years ago I was asked whether I did not believe that public
officials should have more time to think, and in reply I said:
"I have known a good many men who think they think but who,
for the most part, are merely echoing opinions or prejudices they
have heard over the luncheon table or with which they have grown
up. Or they parrot the customary talk of the trade or occupation
they happen to be in.
"In Government particularly those in positions of great
responsibility ought to have a comprehensive understanding not

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

-3"mercly of their own department or specialty, but of the entire
economic and political scene at home and abroad if they are to
make intelligent policy decisions. Few men in public life have
anything like a global view of affairs.
"It is not enough just to organize onefs time in order to be
free to think. You have to know how to think, how to assemble
and relate facts, which are so often elusive. And then if the
thinking is to amount to anything, there must be character and
courage, the willingness to make decisions and to make enemies,
and to face inevitable opposition. It is only the men, whether
they think or not, who straddle or avoid issues who also avoid
making enemies."
There is a growing cynicism in the world today, especially among
the young people—cynicism resulting from the human failures which have lead
to the tr&fic conditions existing throughout the world. I noted in a recent
New York Times book review the comment that some contemporary authors contend
that "life has no discernible direction or purpose, that ideals are illusions,
that common values have disappeared, and that a sensitive person is bound to
be destroyed or corrupted in a modern society in which common values have
disappeared". Having frankly admitted that my generation has made many
mistakes, I still say from my own personal experience that life has both discernible direction and purpose, that ideals are not illusions, that common
values have not disappeared, and that a sensitive person need not be destroyed
or corrupted by modern society. Those of us who view the present end future
with cynicism must strive to regain a proper perspective. We must not let the
events of the moment obscure the illustrious record of the progress of
civilisation. We must not, as Tennyson once wrote, let "the hills of time
shut out the mountains of eternity".
Notwithstanding our mistakes our nation has flourished and our free
enterprise system of democracy has provided us with by far the highest standard
of living of any nation on earth. Unlike some countries that I could name
where the rich liave been getting richer and the poor have been getting poorer,
our oim development during the past two decades has been just the opposite* We
have gone far toward bringing about a more equitable distribution, than was
t
!
;
e cane 20 years ago, of the goods and services which we as a nation can produce . In 1929 the highest 5 per cent of all income recipients obtained 34.
per cent of the total national income, while, at the present time, they receive but 13 per cent of the total. Meanwhile the share of total income
received by those in the lower income classes has increased proportionately.
This means that we have in the years since 1929, accomplished one of the great
social revolutions of history, a revolution that has developed gradually and
has been, and will continue to be, of inestimable benefit to our entire nation.
The fact that such a redistribution of income has been affected without social unrest and upheaval or dislocation of our productive activities is
in itself an eloquent testimonial to our economic, social, and political
institutions.

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

-it-

While recognizing and paying tribute to the advantages of our type
of society, we must not lose sight of its shortcomings and failures, particularly in its relationship to other nations of the world. We have talked
loudly in foreign capitals about the advantages of democratic capitalism,
but we have failed to convince our foreign listeners by our action. Take,
for example, the serious situation in Iran, which could touch off another
world war. An authority, commenting upon this situation, recently said:
"Unfortunately, as things balance up for the Iranians, the
possible economic consequences of their actions do not weigh very
heavily. They do not feel they have much to lose. This is the
West's great failure. Once-proud Persia is a poor, backward,
stagnant, feudal land, haphazardly governed by a few rich
families. Here resentments, deep and bitter, are compounded by
religious antagonism. They lead, inevitably, to a rabid nationalist sentiment, subscribed to alike by the political right and left.
Iran is a classic example of the colonial area which capitalism
has left rotten ripe for communism. The British and ourselves
have talked a lot about helping to improve the lot of the average
Iranian. Talk is about as far as it has gone."
In Iran* China, Korea, Indo-China and elsewhere we and the other
countries of the Western World have failed singularly to provide the tangible
benefits of democratic capitalism that would have averted the spread of
communism. Instead, we have given our blessing and backing to reactionary
governments that lack the confidence and support of the people. We have
failed to realize that a large part of the world is in a state of economic
revolution which we view as communist inspired and try to buy off with dollars
or settle through war. We must recognize that the communists can only exploit
the conditions that will continue to exist unless we ourselves, in our foreign
policy, deal with the underlying causes of world-wide revolution. As Supreme
Court Justice Douglas has said:
"American foreign policy never has been addressed to the
conditions under which these revolutions flourish. We send
technical experts to help in seed selection, soil conservation,
malaria controls and the like. But we never raise our voices
for reforms of the vicious tenancy system
under which
increased production works to the benefit of a few. We talk
about democracy and justice, and at the same time we support
regimes in those countries whose object is to keep both democracy and justice out of reach of the peasants for all time."
Democratic capitalism, if it is to survive, must hold its own against
communism, by works rather than by words, in the undeveloped backward areas of
the world. Talking alone will not win many converts to the democratic causeonly by bringing them the tangible benefits of increased agricultural and
industrial production, more efficient methods of distribution, and greater
equality of income can we expect the underprivileged masses of the world to
forsake the glittering but never fulfilled promises of communism. Those who
complain that the cost of such a program would be exorbitant must remember

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

-5that we never hesitate to spend for war or defense whatever may be necessary,
but we become relatively tight-fisted in our civilian expenditures for maintaining the peace of the world. This country alone spent over 400 billion
dollars to win World War II, and is now embarked on a defense program that
will cost 50 to 60 billion dollars a year for an indefinite period of time.
Yet, wars never solve any of the world1s problems, but only accentuate them.
Will the world never learr., before it is too late, to use the resources that
are wasted on war or defense against war for the benefit of the people of the
world in an effort to eradicate the basic causes of war and the need for defense?
In addition to finding ways and means for sharing the material benefits as well as the ideals of democracy with the other nations of the world,
we must face up to what is perhaps the most fundamental problem of all—overpopulation. A biologist, Julian Huxley, has said "human population is
probably the greatest problem of our time
we need a positive population
policy for the world as a whole and for each of the nations in it. Such a
population policy will be in the highest degree moral, in stressing the
wickedness of allowing future generations to be born in increasing misery and
permitting the entire race to suffer genetic degeneration."
We cannot hope to improve the lot of the common man in China, India,
Japan or any of the other over-crowded and under-developed nations of the
world if the only check on the number of their inhabitants is the availability
of food. The existence of large masses of people subsisting at starvation
levels is an open invitation to revolution and communism, since most people
will try to fight their way out of a bad situation before they will willingly
starve to death. Such improvements in the standard of living as the democratic
system of production and distribution of the western world might provide,
would, in the absence of a positive population policy, quickly be dissipated
among the rapidly increasing numbers of people. Even in our own country we
may well be facing in time a serious problem of over-population if our present
percentage rate of population growth continues. At that rate the United States
alone would have, within 150 years, more people than the present population of
the entire earth.
The two basic causes of world conflict—rapidly gowing population
and consequent inadequacy of the means of production and distribution necessary to feed and clothe such numbers of people—must be dealt with realistically in many areas of the earth if peace is to be established and maintained.
Misguided idealism must not be allowed to obscure the need for hard-headed
realism in dealing with the basic causes of war. While we have adapted the
laws of nature to serve our own ends in the realm of the physical sciences,
we have chosen to ignore or neglect such adaptation in the social sciences.
It has been said; "We live in a Universe which stands for no nonsense from anyone and which orders us to play not the fool but the man in solving our problems'.1
Since we failed in the past to remedy the basic causes of world conflict, we find ourselves today confronted with an immediate and pressing need
for providing more adequate national defense in an effort to forestall the
outbreak of another world war. However, we must recognize the fact that our
defense preparedness program is at best a temporary and transitional solution—
Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

-6a means of deterring war while we strive for achievement of a more permanent
solution of the fundamental problems that lead to war. Another global war
would mean total war with atomic and all other weapons of destruction, and
likely could not be won by anyone; on the contrary, it might well lead to
the destruction of civilization itself* I believe that the people of the
world, including the Russian masses, are against war, because modern war
places every man, woman, and child in the front line of battle, exposing them
to suffering and hardship beyond the limits of human endurance• Warfare today
has obliterated the meaning of space and time—land distances and ocean
barriers no longer afford protection; the whole earth has been encompassed
into a relatively small neighborhood. We must not, therefore, allow ourselves
to think of war as inevitable, for, to quote from a recent editorial, "out of
another war would come such an abomination of destruction and annihilation,
such a desolate aftermath of woe and upheaval, such sorrow and revulsion
everywhere that the only happy people would be the dead people."
We must be resolute in our determination to prevent war; we must
design and carry out a defense preparedness and foreign aid program which
will deter the Russian leaders from starting a third world war. In doing so
we must choose our strategy and weapons of defense carefully with an eye upon
their cost as well as their effectiveness, in order that we do not destroy
the very system our program is designed to protect. This can happen by permitting further deterioration in the purchasing power of the dollar and weakening our defenses by squandering our resources of manpower and materials.
This means a program which we are able and willing to pay for currently, since it must be sustainable for an indefinite period of time. The
Kremlin's hope, of course, is that through our failure to control inflation
we will accomplish the destruction of our own economic and political system
and make the communist conquest of the United States both cheap and easy,
just as inflation paved the way for Hitler's rise to power in Germany. From
a political standpoint, inflation that leads to economic bankruptcy is the
most powerful instrument of communist infiltration.
In order to utilize our resources of manpower and material most
effectively we should rely primarily upon overwhelming control of the air and
the sea for the purpose of deterring communist aggression, and we should conserve our manpower for use where it is most effective—in our production lines.
We cannot afford to become further embroiled with land armies on the continent
of Europe or Asia. We should recognize the facts that our unrivalled productive capacity is our strongest line of defense, that our ability to produce
is largely determined by our available manpower, and that our country is the
arsenal and keystone of the free nations of the world.
I have sought to face the great, the inescapable problems, as I see
them, which are a challenge to our best thought and our character as a nation
today. We can defeat ourselves by cynicism, by faintheartedness, and by failure to think clearly and boldly. We can succeed if we will have the courage,
the character, the unconquerable spirit and the vision which inspired the forefathers of our nation. Your forebears
and mine, who came to these mountains
and valleys in their covered wagons and created from the desert wastelands this

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

~7~
fertile and prosperous State did not ^aver in the face of danger and difficulty*
In the founding of their nation and the extension of its frontiers, our people
overcame obstacles which loomed quite as large then as those with which we are
confronted now. We would do well to remember what St. Paul said to the Romans;
lf

We glory in tribulations; knowing that tribulation worketh
patience; and patience, experience; and experience, hope.11
(Romans 5:3-4)
The great playwright, Robert Sherwood, in commenting on this quotation, had
thib to say:
"After the outbreak of the Second World War—after the
n'azis invaded Poland and the Red A m y invaded Finland—I quoted
those words of St. Paulfs, and Alfred Lunt spoke them in the
play, fThere Shall Be No Night.1 Those were times of tribulation indeed, and far worse tribulations were soon to come, and
those words were given supreme test. But there were men of
faith—men who could say, fI have nothing to offer but blood,
toil, tears and sweat,1 or 'The only thing we have to fear is
fear itself1—and this patience bred experience, and experience
bred hope and eventual victory.
"Again we are in times of (great) tribulation.
"We should do well to remember that St. Paulfs words of
eternal reassurance are still available to men and women of
(vision and) faith."
I could do no better, in conclusion, than to quote from an address
of a great leader—Woodrow Wilson—speaking at Swarthmore College in October
1913:
"How many of you will volunteer to carry the spiritual messages of liberty to the world? How many of you will forego
anything except your allegiance to that which is just and that
which is right? We die but once, and we die without distinction
if we are not willing to die the death of sacrifice.
"Do you covet honor? You will never get it by serving yourself. Do you covet distinction? You will get it only as the
servant of mankind. Do not forget, then, as you walk these
classic places, why you are here. You are not here merely to
prepare to make a living. You are here to enable the world to
Jive more amply, with greater vision, with a finer spirit of hope
and achievement. You are here to enrich the world and you
impoverish yourself if you forget the errand."

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

