Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

Z-76U

ADDRESS ON THE
PRESIDENT'S SEVEN-POINT PROGRAM
TO FIGHT RISING LIVING COSTS

BY

MARRINER S . ECCLES
CHAIRMAN OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS
OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM

DELIVERED OVER THE
MUTUAL BROADCASTING SYSTEM
STATION WOL, WASHINGTON, D . C ,
WEDNESDAY EVENING, JUNE 2l+, 191+2

FOR RELEASE AT 8 t i g

P.M.

WEDNESDAY, JUNE 2l+, 191+2

Z-76U
In his radio talk to the nation and in his Message to Congress,
the President told you why we must not let the cost of living get out of
hand. He told you of his seven-point program and made it clear that all
of the program and not just some parts of it would be necessary to win
this economic battle on the home front.
I have been asked to speak to you briefly tonight more particularly about the seventh point in the Presidents program. You will recall
that this point stressed the importance at this time of discouraging credit
and instalment buying and encouraging the paying of debts. Paying debts
and not incurring new ones are an essential part of the program to keep the
cost of living from spiraling upward. Those who comply with it will be
grateful thattiieyhave done so when this war is over.
To this end, the Federal Reserve System has issued regulations
with which you are familiar in a general way. .You know that when you go
to a store to buy something on instalments, you are asked to make a down
payment in most cases of one^third of the purchase price and you are asked
to pay for the article in full in twelve months or less. Or, if you have
a charge account, you are asked to pay that account by the tenth of the
second month* If you do not settle the account by that time, you are
asked to place it on an instalment basis before you are allowed to charge
any more articles. Those, in general, are the terms required.
The reasons for asking you to pay your debts and to refrain from
buying unnecessarily, at this time ** the reasans why this is the time to
save, to pay taxes and to invest in War Bonds •• should be made clear to
you so that you will give your support to the Presidents program, for it
is devised in your interest.
You are aware that national income is rapidly going up. It is
going up because the Government is approaching an expenditure of 150
million dollars a day for war purposes. It is expected to increase to 200
million dollars a day before the year ends. It is this huge expenditure
which is rapidly expanding national income, which is the sum of all wages,
salaries, dividends, rents, interest and other income received by individuals — and approximately two^thirds of it represents wages and salaries.
Today our national income is running at the rate of close to 110
billion dollars a year. It is estimated that it will soon reach a rate of
117 billion dollars a year* Even in 1929 national income was 30^billions
less than it is right new- It is still increasing., And this is happening
at the very time when Ihere. are fewer and fewer things for us to buy*
If we had the plants, the
turn out more and more war supplies
more civilian goods, there wouldn't
the more goods you could buyf But,

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

labor forces, the raw materials, to
and at the same time turn out more and
be any problem. The more money you had,
of course, that is not the case because

- 2

Z-76I+

there are limits •» including time limits — on our ability to produce war
supplies for ourselves and for our allies and at the same time produce for
civilian consumption* Since our very existence is at stake, war production
must have the right of way over everything else. That means more and more
of our industrial resources and manpower must be used for war production,
less and"\ess for civilian production. It means more munitions, planes,
ships, tanks. It means fewer automobiles, refrigerators, houses, and many
other things that are available in peacetime.
Clearly, then, there is but one course open to us. We must go
without things we canft buy. We should go without things we do not need
to buy. There is no real hardship, no great sacrifice, in this. There
is adequate food, clothing and shelter, and we can make things last longer.
One objective of the President's progran is to see that what is
available is as fairly distributed as possible. Another objective is to
keep the rising pressure of spending power from flooding our markets and
driving up prices •• not just the prices of civilian goods, but the prices
of war materials as well. We must not let that happen. It would impair
our war efforts. It would increase the costs of the war. It would make
the financing of the war and post-war readjustments much more difficult.
It would bring many other evils* Your pay envelopes, though they contained more dollars, would buy less and less* Instead of getting out of
debt, instead of saving for the future, you would merely be exchanging
more and more dollars for fewer and fewer things. How much better off
you would be to get out of debt, to save those dollars until peace comes
when our vast productive capacity can be turned from war to peace production*
Saving means deferred buying power. It is just common sense to
defer the buying power we have now but cannot use without driving up tine
cost of living — defer it until peace comes, when we will have the manpower, the machinery, to turn out the goods — when your buying will help
sustain full production and employment *- when, if we manage our affairs
intelligently, we can produce the goods to meet the public demand without
the upward spiraling of the cost of living. That is in your interest.
That is why you are being asked not to buy anything you do not need — why
you are asked to put every dollar you can into War Bonds. You can make no
better investment for your future welfare.
For the same reasons you are asked not to go into debt to buy
things* You are asked to pay much heavier taxes than ever before because
this not only helps pay for the war, as do your investments in War Bonds,
but it helps keep your dollars from bidding up prices* You are asked not
to seek higher wage rates, salaries, dividends, arid other returns, and if
you are a farmer you are asked not to seek higher prices, because such
actions increase buying power but do not add to what you can buy.

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

- 3-

Z-76U

If the Government's rapidly increasing expenditures and the
consequent rapid rise in national income were accompanied by production
of an equivalent amount of goods for you to buy, it would not be necessary
to ask you in your own interest to comply with and support this program.
But the Governments expenditures must go mainly for war production and
not for the things for which you might spend your dollars.
Accordingly, the logic of the situation calls for Government
policy designed to draw back into the Treasury out of this expanding
national income an. amount equal to what the Government is spending. And
this can be done through taxes and through the sale of Government securities. So far as the Treasury can in this way get back as much as it
spends for war, the financing of the war is readily accomplished.
More than that, however, the effects of this policy are threes
fold. First, it draws off the market money that might otherwise bid up
prices. Secondly, spending power is reduced in relation to the supply of
civilian goods. Third, the Government is able to finance the war without
borrowing from the commercial banks -~ for such borrowing creates
additional money, and may have highly inflationary effects.
It is not a sacrifice, but a privilege, as the President has
well said, for all of us to do our part in supporting the Government's
program for safeguarding the economic front at home. Because when we
have won this war our tremendous productive power now engaged in making
destructive things of vrar will be released to make the constructive things
of peace. We will have the greatest technological development, the
greatest industrial machine, the biggest army of skilled workers that the
world has ever seen. Freed from diverting fifty per cent or more of our
energies to war, turning those same energies to peace, we can have a far
higher standard of living than we have ever known.
We will need only the will and the wisdom to realize this promise
of a better day. That is v
\
/
h
a
t we are fighting for. Certainly we are not
engaged in this agonizing struggle to preserve our democracy so that hunger,
want and poverty may stalk through our land again. Certainly we are not
asking our armed forces to risk and to give their lives for a peace that
will permit the re-emergence in this world of the economic evils which
have given rise to Hitler and his partners in human oppression.
We are fighting to preserve our democracy because it can, and it
must if it is to survive, achieve not only the Four Freedoms of the Bill
of Bights, but also the economic freedoms which the modern world demands —•
freedom from involuntary unemployment; freedom from the fear of insecurity
in old age; freedom from poverty; and freedom from want.

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

