BOARD OF GOVERNORS
OF THE
FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
For immediate release

Friday• April 27t 1951*

STATEMENT OF MARRINER S. ECCLES, MEMBER
BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
BEFORE
THE SENATE BANKING AND CURRENCY COMMITTEE CONSIDERING
LEGISLATION TO ABOLISH THE RECONSTRUCTION FINANCE CORPORATION
Mr. Chairman and Members of the Committee:
I appreciate the opportunity to appear here this morning and give my
reasons why I feel that the Reconstruction Finance Corporation should be
abolished. I am speaking for myself and not for the Federal Reserve Board. I
am speaking as one who has been in Government service for the past seventeen
years and who, during that entire period, has taken an active part in helping
to solve the problems of maintaining economic stability within the framework
of our democratic capitalistic society. I have, ever since the termination
of the war, viewed with grave misgiving? the continuation and expansion of the
Government in the field of private lending. There are sound and indisputable
reasons why the RFC should be abolished. With your permission I shall present,
as briefly and directly as possible, what I consider the most important reasons.
Inflation and Its Control
Throughout the postwar period, and particularly since the Korean invasion, the country has experienced a most serious inflationary development.
This was brought about by too much money and credit in the hands of the public
relative to the goods and services available in the market. The RFC, instead
of liquidating its outstanding credits during this period, added to inflationary pressures by extending its lending activities and those of its affiliate, FNMA. Inflation has greatly depreciated the purchasing power of the
dollar, and as a result the cost of living has increased approximately 45 per
cent since the end of the war. This has been a most serious and unjustified
development, and should not have been permitted; this inflation has worked a
grave injustice upon large numbers of our peoplej it has injured most the
aged, the pensioners, the widows and the disabled — the most helpless members
of our society. Inflation diminishes our incentives to work, to save, and to
plan for the future, and in so doing undermines the very foundations of our
free democratic society.
With a rapid increase in defense expenditures immediately confronting us, prevention of further inflation will be difficult. If it is to be
avoided, all of us must support fiscal, monetary, and credit measures essential
to its control. With full utilization of our manpower and raw materials, it
is imperative that the Federal cash budget be maintained on a pay-as-you-go
basis. This is necessary to assure the transfer of funds from the civilian

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

-2economy to the Government to pay for the goods and services that are transferred* Otherwise, more funds will accumulate in the hands of the public
than there are goods and services available for the public to buy. Such a
condition will lead to further inflation. To prevent such a development,
taxes have already been raised and will have to be raised further to keep
pace with the increase in defense expenditures.
However, the success of an anti-inflationary program depends on more
than a balanced budget. Despite the existence of a substantial budgetary
surplus since Korea, a very rapid growth of bank credit has intensified inflationary pressures. As taxes increase, efforts to offset the resulting reduction in incomes give rise to increased demands for all types of credit, thereby tending to minimize the effects of a balanced budget. For this reason, an
adequate program of credit restraint is essential to the success of a pay-asyou-go tax program.
Such a program of credit restraints has been developed, including
control of consumer credit through Regulation W, of real estate mortgage credit
through Regulation X, and of business credit through the Voluntary Credit Restraint Program provided for in the Defense Production Act of 1950 and under
the supervision of the Federal Reserve Board• The need of further legislation
to curb the growth of bank credit is being considered. Most important of all,
the monetary and fiscal authorities have just recently reached an accord with
reference to the management of the public debt that may go far toward curbing
bank credit expansion, providing a balanced budget is maintained. All of the
measures so adopted have received endorsement and support in congressional and
financial circles, as well as by the general public.
Government Lending Inconsistent With Anti-Inflationary Program
The Government is obviously very inconsistent when it acts to balance
the Federal budget and restrain credit expansion to prevent inflation, while
at the same time continuing in force and effect lending activities of Government agencies such as the RFC. There is no logical justification for restricting the flow of good private credit, and at the same time permitting and encouraging the granting of unjustified and unsound loans by Government agencies
to the private economy.
We must recognize that the conditions under which the RFC came into
existence were very different from those prevailing at the present time. It
was established in the depths of the greatest economic depression in our
history for the purpose of providing emergency financial assistance to banks
and other financial institutions. Subsequently, its authority was broadened
to include loans to nonfinancial business concerns under certain conditions•
Because there were many weaknesses in our economic system in the early
thirties, no one seriously questioned the need for a temporary Government
agency designed to assist the country in an economic emergency which was forcing all financial institutions, as a matter of self-preservation, to liquidate
all outstanding credits.

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

-3¥e have long since recognized and corrected many of the weaknesses
that brought about our economic collapse in the Thirties. We have greatly
strengthened our commercial banking system and provided for insurance of bank
depositsj we have provided for regulation and supervision of security
flotations and the operation of the organized securities exchanges; and the
Government has recognized by statute its obligation to assist in the maintenance of maximum employment and has provided extensive social security for
a large number of the people. In addition, we have improved our techniques
and gained valuable experience in the use of monetary, credit, and fiscal
policies for purposes of achieving and maintaining economic stability. For
these and other reasons, the necessity for continuing the RFC as an emergency
financial institution no longer exists.
The problems confronting the country today are the very opposite of
those which confronted the country when the RFC was first established. In
our present situation, the operations of the RFC, as well as those of FNMA,
in continuing to put additional funds into the spending stream only intensify
the already difficult problem of curbing credit expansion. Having long since
outlived its usefulness to the economy, the RFC should be abolished without
further delay.
No Need for Direct Government Financing
There is no real place in a private enterprise economy for direct
Government lending to the private economy, any more than there is a place for
direct Government ownership of the means of production. Government participation in either activity is socialistic in nature and will, if continued
and expanded, weaken and ultimately destroy the private free enterprise system. The Government's function is to regulate and supervise the activities
of private enterprise in the public interest, and not to own and operate taxfree financing or production organizations in competition with those that
are privately owned and operated and are taxed. Ve might feel differently
about the RFC if our private financing facilities and resources were unable
to provide the credit required to utilize as fully as possible the labor and
materials available in the economy. But such is not the case at the present
time.
There are located throughout the United States more than 34,000 commercial banks, over 600 life insurance companies, more than 500 mutual savings
banks, and nearly 6,000 savings and loan associations. In addition, there are
numerous mortgage companies, sales finance companies, industrial loan associations, and other financing institutions. Each and every one of them, operating with funds obtained from private sources and in competition with numerous
other institutions, is engaged in extending credit, in accordance with selfsurviving and profit motive lending and investment policies, to meet all of the
legitimate needs of a private enterprise economy. The very fact that these
financing institutions are competitive and derive their earnings from the loans
and investments which they make is in itself an assurance that the necessary
credit requirements of the economy are being, and will continue to be, met.
The combined resources at the disposal of these institutions are enormous; as

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

-4of December 31> 1950, the commercial banks, life insurance companies, mutual
savings banks, and savings and loan associations alone held over 290 billion
dollars of loans, investments and other assets, and they are adding billions
of dollars to these assets every year.
To continue the existence of the RFC in competition with our private financing institutions is completely indefensible if we really believe in
our private enterprise economy. This is because the RFC's only source of
funds is the Federal Treasury, while the Treasury1s only source of funds is
the private economy through tax collections or by borrowing to meet a budgetary
deficit. Using these funds to make loans that cannot be secured in a free
market means in effect that the EFC is employing funds obtained from the entire
public in making questionable loans for the benefit of a select few* It is
obviously unfair for the Government to subsidize with credit those business
concerns which cannot stand on their own feet, but nevertheless are competing
for sales and profits with concerns that have to obtain the funds they use in
the private market. In other words, privately financed business concerns are
called upon to provide indirectly through the Government part of the funds
used by their competitors who receive RFC loans.
As the Government does not own the business enterprises which it
finances by means of direct pr guaranteed loans, any profits from their operations accrue to the private owners. But, if the loan eventually proves to be
a loss, either in part or in whole, the Government, and ultimately the taxpayer, suffers the amount of such loss. There have been conspicuous examples
of bcarowers from RFC who made great profits through the use of the taxpayers1
money, as well as of borrowers who incurred substantial losses at the expense
of the taxpayers. If we are going to be Socialistic in some of our economic
activities, it had better be by going into business directly where the profits
as well as the losses accrue to the taxpayer, instead of indirectly through
providing unjustified credit where only the losses accrue to the taxpayer. I
am vigorously opposed to either form of Socialization.
The RFC obtains its funds without cost from the taxpayer and pays
no taxes of any kind on its operations, while privately owned and operated
financing institutions must raise their capital in the private market and pay
in interest and dividends whatever is required. They must also pay their
share of local as well as Federal taxes. Quite obviously, a company operating
with an abundance of free capital on a tax-free basis during a period of inflation can make its earnings appear to be much better than a careful analysis
of the facts would warrant.
Perhaps the argument most frequently heard in support of the RFC's
continuance is the aid which it provides to small businesses, which presumably
are unable to obtain financial assistance from any other source. However, if
we examine the reports of the RFC we find that while the number of loans made
to small businesses is large, the dollar volume of such loans is small relative
to the total amount of loans granted or outstanding. In other words, the bulk
of the funds loaned by RFC have gone to large, rather than small, businesses.
Moreover, it is the considered opinion of experts in the field of small

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

-5business financing that what small businesses need primarily is managerial
and technical assistance rather than more money. To encourage inefficient
utilization of financial resources by small business is wasteful, extravagant and in the end unproductive* The RFC does not have the specialized
facilities required to provide adequate managerial and technical assistance
to small business, and it should be left to private enterprise to develop
them, as well as to supply whatever capital and credit are needed, especially
under present conditions.
RFC Lending Subject to Political Pressure
One of the most striking facts brought to light during the recent
investigation of the RFC is the extent to which its lending activities have
been subject to political influence. The RFC is designated to make or
guarantee loans to credit-worthy borrowers who cannot secure credit on
reasonable terms from customary sources. Under this arrangement heavy political pressures have been brought to bear by and on behalf of borrowers who
expect to benefit from the credit. The problems of a public lending agency,
as compared with a private one, are immeasurably increased by such pressures.
If only sound and justifiable loans were granted, there would be great
criticisms of the RFC by the would-be borrowers and their political representatives. If it does grant questionable loans in response to political requirements, then, as the recent investigation has shown, it will be bitterly
criticized by the public. So long as there is a Government lending agency
like the RFC there will be great and undeniable demand for unsound and unjustified credit. This will put all members of Congress under more or less
political pressure to assist applicants in receiving such credit. I should
think in these circumstances members of Congress would be the first ones to
want to liquidate the RFC and be relieved of the pressures which only add to
their responsibilities and can serve no useful public purpose.
Aside from the economic considerations which I have enumerated there
are strong collateral reasons for abolishing the RFC. It has already been
demonstrated that where a Government agency has wide discretion in loaning
large amounts of funds to the voting public, its ethical and moral standards
deteriorate over a period of time as a result of inevitable political pressures. This has the unfortunate effect of tending to destroy the confidence
of the people in their Government.
Credit for Defense Purposes
In letting defense contracts, priority should be given to those
prime contractors or subcontractors who have the necessary skill, productive
facilities, and financial resources. However, it may be found necessary, as
in World War II, to facilitate defense production by giving some contracts to
those who do not have adequate financial resources and cannot obtain them from
private financing institutions. In such casep, some Government help may be
essential, but it should be provided in the form of a Government guarantee of
private credit and not by a direct Government loan. Such guarantees would be

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

-6most effectively handled under a single program, each as that authorized by
the Defense Production Act of 1950* This provides for guarantee of loans by
eight agencies engaged in defense activities, using the Eederal Reserve Banks
as fiscal agencies in arranging the guarantees* This is the same as the
Regulation V program which was used so effectively in Woi^ld War II* Under
this regulation the Federal Reserve Banks and their branches throughout the
country gained extensive experience in authorizing guarantees on 8,800 loans,
amounting to over 10 billion dollars. The net result of the V-loan operation
was a net profit of 2k million dollars from the loan guarantee fees charged,
after deducting all expenses and losses.
Under the V-loan program, a defense contractor or subcontractor engaged in defense production who is unable to obtain the necessary credit may
apply for a guaranteed loan to his local bank or other private financing institution. The local Federal Reserve banks, acting as fiscal agents for those
Government agencies which are loan guarantors, review and recommend action to
be taken on loan applications. Upon approval by the guaranteeing agency, the
private banks advance the full amount of the loan and a fee is paid covering
the guaranteed portion of the loan. The guarantee fee ranges from 10 to 40
per cent of the interest rate on the loan, depending upon the percentage of
the loan guaranteed. In practically every casa the banks carry 10 per cent
or more of the loan without a guarantee. Not only is the financing decentralized, but the local banks hnve a real interest in the loan and can be depended
upon to give it necessary supervision. The reauirement of approval by the
guaranteeing agency assures that credit extension is being concentrated in those
industries essential to the defense effort.
The existence of the V-loan program to provide essential defense
credit makes unnecessary the continued existence of the RFC for this purpose.
This is particularly true at a time when heavy inflationary pressures require
the diversion of working capital and credit from non-defense to defense purposes as goods and labor are transferred, rather than try to super-impose
defense credit on top of the existing volume of outstanding credit.
In conclusion, I should like to say that the evidence, both from
an economic and a political standpoint, strongly supports the view that the
liquidation of the RFC is long overdue.

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

