THE CURRENT INFLATION PROBLEM—CAUSES AND CONTROLS*
by
MARRINER S. ECCLES

high level. It is running at a rate of 200 billions
a year, or about two and a half times the total for
1940, the highest year prior to the war. It is due
to a record high agricultural income, high wages of
organized labor and other workers, but not all of
them, and unprecedented business profits. This
is augmented by a readily available supply of excessively easy credit for consumers' goods of all
kinds, for housing, for short- and long-term business loans, for State and municipal expenditures,
and for foreign credits and grants. The notable
exception is loans to buy listed stocks, which are
sharply restricted by the Board's margin requirements.
In the face of these large and expanding demands,
production is practically at capacity and further
growth will necessarily be slow. The physical
volume of output of manufactured goods and minerals in 1947 has averaged 186 per cent of the
1935-39 average. Current output is about one-fifth
below the wartime level, largely because of the reduction in weekly working hours. Agricultural
output in physical terms has continued for the
past three years at record levels of about a third
above the maximum of any prewar year. This
volume reflects general favorable weather and further growth can hardly be expected. Construction
of all kinds, including residential building, is close
to any previous peacetime peak. Expansion in
building is now being retarded by shortages of essential labor and materials. Railroad transportation
is limited by the shortages of railroad cars and other
equipment. Employment is at very high levels with
acute shortages in many fields and with a minimum
of unemployment.
The source of the present inflation is Var financing and the enormous Federal deficits incurred
in preparation for and prosecution of global war.
During the six-year period, June 30, 1940 through
June 30, 1946, the Government raised about 398
billion dollars, but only 176 billion dollars, or 44
per cent came from taxes. The remainder of 222
billions, or about 56 per cent, was raised by borrowing. And of this total which was borrowed,
approximately 90 billion dollars, or 23 per cent
of total needs, was raised by selling Government
securities to the commercial banking system, including those purchased by the Federal Reserve
Banks.

Mr. Chairman and Members of the Committee: In
appearing before you today I wish to make clear
that I am speaking for the Board of Governors of
the Federal Reserve System, an agency of Congress,
and I am not undertaking to speak for the Administration or the Presidents of the 12 Federal Reserve
Banks.
You have requested me to testify, I take it, as to
what might be done in the monetary and credit
field to deal with inflationary forces, which have
already gone so far as to cause very serious maladjustments within the economy. Correction is overdue. The longer it is postponed, the more severe
will be the inevitable reaction.
I am sure this Committee recognizes that a great
many factors and forces contributed to the inflationary problem and that there is no easy, simple,
or single remedy. We are already in the advanced
stages of this disease. It is no longer a question of
preventing it, but of moderating so far as possible
its ultimate ravages.
At best, monetary and credit policy can have only
a supplemental influence in any effective treatment
of either inflation or deflation. In considering what
can be done so far as monetary and credit action is
concerned, it is necessary to make a correct diagnosis of the multiple causes of the situation with
which we are now confronted.
What is inflation? It is the condition which exists when effective demand exceeds the overall
supply of goods and services. Potential overall demand always exceeds supply. What is lacking in
deflation is effective demand. We are witnessing
effective demand today when individuals and businesses, together with State and local governments,
as well as the Federal Government, generally have
money which they are trying to spend, bidding for
an insufficient supply of goods and services. This
effective purchasing power is composed of past
savings, current income, or future credit. The savings were largely accumulated during the war
years in the form of currency, bank deposits and
Government securities.
At the end of 1946, individuals and businesses
held about 223 billion dollars of such liquid savings, or more than three times the prewar total.
Similarly, current national income is at an all-time
* Statement by Chairman Eccles before the Joint Committee
on the Economic Report, Special Session of Congress, Nov. 25,
1947.

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

1

T H E C U R R E N T I N F L A T I O N PROBLEM

As the Reserve Board stated in its 1945 Annual
Report to Congress, it is important to bear in mind
that borrowing from the banking system, whether
by the Government or by others, creates an equivalent addition to the country's money supply. To
the extent that the Government did not finance its
war program by taxation, it was obliged to borrow,
and to the extent that it did not borrow from nonbank investors, it relied upon the banks and thus
created new supplies of money. The Federal Reserve by purchasing Government securities, supplied
the commercial banks with reserves needed as a
basis for the increased money supply.
As a result, the country's money supply, as measured by privately held demand deposits and currency in circulation, increased more than two and
one-half times, rising from less than 40 billion dollars in June of 1940 to 106 billions at the end of
June 1946. In the same period, time or savings
deposits nearly doubled. In addition, the general
public, outside of banks, insurance companies, and
Government agencies, accumulated or increased
holdings of Government securities to 100 billion
dollars, or nearly seven times as much as in June of
1940. These Government securities in the hands
of the public are the equivalent of money because
they are readily convertible into cash.
It should be strongly emphasized that the banking system was the instrument, and not the instigator, of this swollen money supply. The bankers
performed a vital service in the financing of the war
and particularly in the sale and distribution of
savings bonds and of other Government securities.
If it were possible to finance a great war entirely
by taxation there would, of course, be no increase in
the public debt. Or if it were possible to do the
financing by a combination of taxation and borrowing outside of the banking system, there would be
no increase in the money supply. In retrospect,
we can see that we could have and probably should
have taxed more and borrowed more from nonbank investors and less from the banking system.
We are suffering the consequences today of an excessively swollen money supply which neither the
bankers individually nor Government authorities
have adequate means at present of controlling.
In order to enable the banks to purchase Government securities essential to the financing of the
war, the Federal Reserve System maintained easy
money conditions and made Federal Reserve
credit and reserves readily available to the banks.
The vast money supply thus created was held
in check by an elaborate harness of controls consisting, among bther things, of allocations of

2

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

CAUSES A N D

CONTROLS

scarce materials, construction permits, price and
wage ceilings, rationing, and the excess profits
tax. When the harness of controls was prematurely removed and no effective substitute was
devised to hold back the flood of effective demand, it was apparent, or at least it should have
been apparent, that a sharp rise in prices was
inevitable.
As a result, the economy was caught in a dangerous wage-price-profit-credit spiral, acutely intensified by short farm crops abroad, and reduced
corn and cotton crops at home. Critical conditions
abroad, in part resulting from our rising prices,
impose upon us obligations which must be met
even though they add to our inflationary difficulties.
It would be blindly and foolishly optimistic to
believe that the spiral of inflation can continue
through further general wage, price and profit
increases and further overall expansion of credit
without ultimate serious deflation. The longer
the necessary readjustment is delayed, the longer
it will take to reach a stable condition of employment and production. The most serious maladjustments are evidenced by the increasing numbers
of our people whose incomes do not keep pace with
the rising cost of living. They are being priced
out of the market for housing and many other
things, and in countless instances their savings
and credit have already been exhausted. The
higher prices rise and credit expands, the greater
the subsequent liquidation and downward pressure
on prices is bound to be. As the November letter
of the National City Bank of New York correctly
states, "Rapidly accumulating debt is both a cause
and a consequence of the inflationary pressures,
for in a wage-price spiral, business constantly
needs more and more money to keep going and
this leads to the incurrence of more and more debt
by business and more and more spending by the
individual. To check this kind of spiralling—
which is to the ultimate benefit of no one and to
the injury of all—is not simple."
The problem we all face now is what can
be done at this late stage, if necessary, to curb
further inflationary developments. As a practical
matter, we cannot now put back the elaborate
harness of wartime controls, and it seems that
we are left only with the choice of certain curbs
or restraints selectively applied at some of the
more critical points of danger.
In the absence of a comprehensive scheme of
controls we must continue to put our main
reliance on fiscal policy, which is by far the

T H E CURRENT INFLATION

PROBLEM

most effective way to deal with the demand
side of the equation, while we do everything
possible to maintain and increase production. We
should have the largest possible budgetary surplus
while the inflation danger exists. And this, means
taking from the public in taxes money that
otherwise would continue in the spending stream.
It means rigid Government economy. It means
deferment of all expenditures, Federal, State, or
local, to the greatest extent consistent with public
obligations at home and abroad. Using the budgetary surplus to pay off bank-held public debt as it
becomes due will reduce the money supply by an
equivalent amount. This is a reversal of the process
by which the money supply was expanded. In an
inflationary boom such as we are experiencing the
Government should pay off as much of its debt as
possible.
Public debt cannot be reduced during deflation,
Budgetary deficits, not surpluses, are an inevitable consequence of serious deflation. Tax
reduction would be appropriate after deflation sets
in, not during an inflationary period. If a reduction of taxes at this time would, in fact,
call forth more production, then it would be
justified. Today we still have acute scarcities of
labor and materials. Adding to existing buying
power either by tax reduction or aggregate expansible of credit can only have the effect ol
bidding up the prices paid for both labor and
materials. If conditions were reversed and we
had idle labor and a surplus of materials and
productive facilities coupled with a shortage of
capital and insufficient purchasing power, then
reductions in taxes, particularly those which
would stimulate mass buying power, would be in
order.
If I were to outline a program to meet the situation with which we are now faced, I would list the
following steps to deal with the causes rather
than with the effects of inflationary pressures. They
are listed in what I consider their order of importance.
1. Increased productivity both at home and
abroad. Production is the ultimate solution for
inflation. Nothing could be more effective than
increased productivity of labor and longer hours
of work by everyone. In short, if all who are
engaged in producing goods and essential services
were to work more, and save more, and spend less,
the unbalanced relationship between demand and
supply would most effectively be corrected and
prices would come down.

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

CAUSES A N D

CONTROLS

2. Suspension of future demands for wage
increases, especially those of organized labor where
the increases have been greatest, is necessary if
the present unbalanced relationship is to be corrected without severe deflation. Business profits
after taxes are more than double what they were
in any prewar year and almost double the profits in
any war year, and therefore business should hold
prices down or should reduce them, in accordance
with what would be reasonable earnings.
I. A fiscal policy to produce the largest possible surplus to be used to pay off bank-held
Government debt and thus reduce the money
supply. This means the greatest possible economy
in all Government expenditures. It means more
adequate financial support of the ta* collection
machinery of the Government to prevent tax
evasion. It means no general decrease in tax
rates at this time. It should also mean the elimination of the agricultural price support program
unless price ceilings are reimposed.
4. Legislation giving the Federal Reserve System such authority as may be necessary to restrict
further overall expansion of bank credit. The need
for this authority would be less if Congress authorized other anti-inflationary measures such as
restoration of consumer instalment credit restrictions and if stricter appraisals and less liberal
credit terms were applied under the Veterans'
Administration, the FHA, and the Home Loan
Bank programs of housing finance.
5. Continuation and expansion of the Treasury's
Savings Bond campaign, with adequate financial
support by Congress. Funds so raised have a twofold effect. It removes these funds from the
spending stream and makes them available to pay
off bank-held debt, thus reducing the money supply.
Other actions have been proposed which, however, deal with the effects rather than the causes.
Allocations, construction permits, price and wage
ceilings, commodity margin requirements, instalment credit regulation, export and rent controls,
and similar devices are all in the category of
curbs rather than cures. Where they can be
applied as a practical matter and enforced, they
can be useful, but they do not go to the sources of
the problem.
I should like to summarize what the Federal
Reserve Board believes might be done in the
monetary and credit field. In its 1945 and 1946
Annual Reports to Congress the Federal Reserve
Board described the situation in which those with
responsibility for monetary policy find themselves

3

T H E CURRENT INFLATION

PROBLEM

as a consequence of the war. As the Hoard stated
in the 1945 report:
"In common with other nations whose energies
were devoted primarily to winning the victory,
the United States had no choice, under the exigencies of a global war, except to use monetary powers
in furtherance of essential war financing and not
as an anti-inflationary weapon. There has been
a widespread assumption that, with the coming of
peace, such statutory powers as the Reserve System
possesses should be exerted in the traditional way
against the heavy inflationary forces at present
confronting the country. The Board believes
that such an assumption does not take sufficiently
into account either the inherent limitations of the
System's existing statutory powers, under presentday conditions, or the inevitable repercussions on
the economy generally and on the Government's
financing operations in particular of an exercise
of such existing powers to the degree necessary
to be an effective anti-inflationary influence."
Of late the Federal Reserve System has been
increasingly criticized for not adequately using
its existing statutory powers to restrain bank credit
expansion. It is very important, therefore, that
the Congress understand what those powers are and
why the Board does not believe they can be used
to deal with the credit problem, and why we suggested in the 1945 and 1946 reports, and suggest
now, that Congress consider providing other authority that may be necessary to cope with the
situation. We did not then and we do not now
seek power, but we feel that we would be remiss,
as an agency of Congress, if we failed to report
the situation as we see it and to propose alternative means of dealing with it inasmuch as we
feel that our existing powers are insufficient.
The Reserve System has always had broad
powers to influence the supply and cost of bank
credit. Through open market operations, that is,
buying and selling of Government securities, the
System either gives reserves to the banks or
absorbs reserves. Reserves are the foundation on
which bank credit is built. If banks have no reserves they cannot lend. But they can obtain
reserves when thev borrow from the Federal
Reserve Banks or sell Government securities to the
Reserve Banks. And the banking system automatically receives reserves through gold acquisitions, and also when the Federal Reserve Banks
buy Government securities from nonbank investors.
The Reserve System can restrain banks from borrowing by raising the discount rate sufficiently

4

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

CAUSES A N D

CONTROLS

high to make the borrowing unprofitable. It could
refuse to buy Government securities and shut off
that source of reserves. It has no powers to deal
with reserves arising from gold acquisitions.
Why, then, doesn't the System simply make the
discount rate prohibitive and at the same time
refuse to buy any more Government securities?
Let me say that if the Congress disagrees with us
and feels, as do some bankers and insurance company executives, that we should more fully use existing powers, we would welcome such an expression from the Congress. In that case, there would
be no need to consider any alternative powers. On
the other hand, if Congress agrees that our existing powers are not appropriate under present circumstances, full consideration should be given to
any proposal that would help to meet the situation.
First, let us consider what the effect would be of
raising the discount rate by itself. Actually, the
effect would be negligible, except for possible psychological reaction, because as long as the System
stands ready to buy Government securities in the
open market, banks can obtain reserves at will by
selling such securities out of their portfolios. Suppose, then, that the System refused to buy the securities—and that is the heart of the matter—what
would the consequences be? Bear in mind that
the total interest-bearing debt of the Government
is 256 billion dollars, more than five times what
it was before the war. The public debt at the
beginning of 1940 was about one-fifth of the total
public and private debt of the country, whereas
at the present time it is nearly two-thirds of the
entire indebtedness of the country. About onethird of the total Government debt is short-term
marketable debt and would need to lie refunded
into higher-rate securities. This would raise the
cost to the Government, and therefore to the taxpayers, of carrying the public debt. Already the nation's tax bill for interest cost is approximately 5
billion dollars or nearly one-seventh of the total
Federal budget.
Just how high would interest rates have to rise to
deter business and individuals from borrowing
from banks? Higher interest rates do not deter
the lender. Rising interest rates are like rising
prices. At some point they do deter the borrower
or the buyer. They do not deter the lender or the
seller. I doubt if anybody knows how high interest
rates, especially short-term rates, would have to rise
to discourage borrowers. Certainly the rates would
have to be substantially above the present relatively
low levels. Bank customers, particularly business,
with seemingly insatiable markets awaiting their

T H E CURRENT INFLATION

PROBLEM

products, are hardly to be deterred by one or two
points of increase in bank interest rates.
The additional costs to the Government in carrying the public debt would be difficult to estimate,
but they would amount to billions a year over a
period of time. If that were the only consequence,
it might be argued that the extra cost to the Government would be justified because inflationary borrowings would cease.
However, this is only one aspect of the matter.
In the process of leaving Government securities to
the free play of variable forces in the market, the
Treasury would be confronted with a continuing
puzzle in all of its constantly recurrent refunding
operations. It could not tell from day to day at
what price it could sell its securities. It would be
entirely at the mercy of uncontrolled factors in the
market, if, indeed, conditions did not become so
confused and chaotic as to demoralize completely
any refunding operations.
I recently saw a prediction by a very keen bond
market analyst that failure of the Reserve System
to support the 2*/2 per cent rate on marketable Government bonds would lead to a wholesale liquidation of all Government bonds, including the nonmarketable E, F and G bonds. He declared that it
would be the most dramatically inflationary move
that could be made at this time, the repercussions
of which would be, as he put it, so catastrophic as
to make present fears appear as one raindrop in
a storm. That is strong language. Nobody can
say with certainty that it is too exaggerated.
In any case, I think it is fairly clear that withdrawing support from the Government securities market
and letting interest rates rise on Government securities would not increase the power of the Federal
Reserve System to offset increases in bank reserves
from gold acquisitions. Sales of System holdings of
Government securities for this purpose would have
to compete with private credit demands. Private
borrowers might outbid us for these reserves.
There would be no certain level of security prices
or interest rates at which we could dispose of
enough Government securities to offset gold imports.
On the other hand, we have to recognize what
would happen if we follow the present course of
policy in order to maintain the public's confidence
in Government credit and avoid any unnecessary
increase in the interest cost to the Government
for carrying the public debt. Commercial banks
currently hold about 70 billion dollars of Government securities. This sum is about 50 per cent
of their total deposits. If they should sell half of

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

CAUSES A N D

CONTROLS

these securities and the Federal Reserve System, in
providing an ultimate market, should buy them, the
banks would acquire an equivalent volume of new
reserves. On the basis of these reserves, the banks
could expand credit by about six times, or by more
than 200 billion dollars. This is nearly double the
present amount of demand deposits and currency.
While it is unlikely that the banks would dispose of
so large a proportion of their holdings, it nevertheless is a measure of the potential bank credit expansion that can occur if the banks are left with complete freedom to convert their Government security holdings into reserves at will.
This bank credit expansion potential is apart
from other sources of bank reserves. Gold is now
flowing into our banking system in large quantities from foreign holdings. As a result, deposits
are increased and on the asset side banks gain an
equal amount of reserves. Over the next year, the
gold inflow is estimated at from 2 to 3 billion
dollars. Multiplied by six, this would permit an
expansion of bank credit of from 12 to 18 billions.
There are two other important potential sources
of increased bank reserves. Nonbank investors,
mainly business corporations, hold about 13 billion
dollars of short-term Government securities. Businesses face increasing needs for working capital
under prevailing inflationary conditions. To some
extent, these needs will be met by sales of shortterm Government securities, which the Reserve
System may have to buy.
The second possible source of bank reserves is
the 59 billions of marketable, medium- and longterm Government securities held by nonbank investors. With widening opportunities for the
placement of funds in private investment at increasingly attractive yields, there is a small amount
of shifting by investors of their holdings of
marketable long-term Government securities. If
inflation continues, this shifting will likely increase. Such sales have to be met by Federal
Reserve support of the prices of marketable Government bpnds so as to protect the 21/2 per cent rate
on long-term issues. The result of these support
operations is to increase bank reserves arid thus
to support further inflation.
Under present and prospective conditions, it is
not only desirable but essential, in the opinion of
the Treasury and of the Reserve System, that the
established 2l/2 per cent rate on long-term marketable Government securities be maintained.
The Federal Reserve Board has one other
power that it has been criticized by some for
not using. That is the power to raise the reserve

5

T H E C U R R E N T I N F L A T I O N PROBLEM

requirements of the banks in New York and
Chicago from 20 to 26 per cent of their net demand deposits. This is a relatively minor matter
and does not in any way go to the heart of the
problem. Any action taken would have an
effect on banking conditions only in two cities in
which the credit expansion, as well as deposit
growth, has been relatively less than for the rest
of the country.
We have given a great deal of study to this
admittedly difficult and complex problem. We are
convinced that the remedy of letting interest rates
on Government debt go up on the theory that
this would bring an end to inflationary borrowing
is dubious at best, as has been demonstrated in
past monetary history, notably in the 20's when high
rates were unsuccessful in restraining speculation in
the stock markets, real estate, or otherwise.
As was made clear in the Annual Report for
1946, we are not opposed in principle to higher
interest rates if some desirable ends and the public
interest can be served by such a policy. In fact, in
recent months we have cooperated with the Treasury in permitting some moderate, corrective rise
from wartime levels of interest rates on short-term
Government securities. This adjustment was made
to reduce the wide differential prevailing between
short-term and long-term interest rates. Such
a large differential was having the effect of encouraging banks to sell short-term securities, which
the Federal Reserve bought, and to buy long-term
securities in the process, thereby encouraging
multiple credit expansion. The differential in
rates was also exerting a strong downward pressure on yields of long-term securities. We were
aware that this decline was artificially induced by
investment policies of the banking system known
as monetization of the public debt, and resulted in
bank credit expansion. We also recognized the importance of checking the decline in long-term interest rates to protect educational, charitable, and
pension funds, as well as insurance institutions,
savings banks, and individuals depending upon interest for income.
The action permitting a moderate rise in shortterm interest rates coincided, however, with strong
demands for long-term funds, which put considerable strain on the market for corporate and municipal securities. As a consequence, these issues have
been made more attractive as investments. They
are thus somewhat more competitive with longterm Governments than before. We have to face
this fact of the market place and be prepared to offset any shifts in investor holdings from Government

6

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

CAUSES A N D

CONTROLS

bonds to other securities. The undesirable aspect of
the situation, from the standpoint of inflationary
credit conditions, is that support of Government
bonds adds to bank reserves. These developments
indicate that a policy of permitting interest rates on
short-term Government securities to rise has gone
about as far as can be justified under present circumstances.
We have, therefore, been compelled to seek some
better alternative than higher interest rates to restrain further bank credit expansion. We believe
that one is available which will not make the Government and the taxpayer bear the added cost of the
restraint, that will impose very little, if any, hardship on the banks, that will, in fact, have a compensating aspect in that the restraint imposed would
increase interest rates on private borrowings without additional cost to the Government.
I refer to the second alternative proposed in the
1945 Annual Report. We recommend for consideration, as the best alternative we have been able to
devise, that all commercial banks be required as a
temporary measure to hold some percentage of
their demand and time deposits, in addition to
present reserves, in a special reserve in the form of
Treasury bills, certificates and notes or cash, cash
items, interbank balances, or balances with Federal
Reserve Banks.
Such a requirement would be far less onerous
for the banking system than any other effective
method that has been suggested in the long period
in which this problem has been discussed by bankers, by economists, and public officials. Manifestly,
such a requirement would have to be imposed
gradually, if at all, as an offset, for example, to bank
reserves created by gold acquisitions and by the
purchase of Government securities from nonbank
investors, and also to limit the too ready availability
of reserves, now enabling banks to obtain them at
will. A multiple expansion of credit can be built
on these reserves at a ratio of fully six dollars
of lending for every dollar of reserves. We would
propose that the special reserve requirement be
limited by law to a maximum of 25 per cent on demand and 10 per cent on time deposits. It should
be made applicable to all commercial banks. It
wouH not be effective if applied only to member
banks of the Federal Reserve System, and would be
an unjustifiable discrimination.
We recognize that this proposal is no panacea,
but it would be an important, available restraint,
now lacking, to be applied equally to all commercial banks so that the individual banker would be
in the same competitive situation he is in today.

THE

CURRENT

INFLATION

PROBLEM

Over the next four m o n t h s there is likely to he
little need for the suggested special reserve hecause of the large a m o u n t of Treasury surplus
funds, taken from the market t h r o u g h taxes, which
will be available to retire bank-held public debt.
T h i s would temporarily exert pressure against bank
credit expansion.
T h e proposed special reserve requirement has
a n u m b e r of important advantages over other
methods of dealing with the problem of restricting
the b a n k s ' expansion of credit:
1. T h e plan would have about the same effect
in limiting credit expansion as an increase in
primary reserve requirements, which was proposed as the third alternative in the 1945 Annual
Report. It would enable the banks to retain the
^same volume of earning assets that they now hold,
whereas an increase in basic reserve requirements
would m a k e it necessary for them to reduce earning assets, with adverse effects upon the earnings
position of banks.
2. T h e ratio of potential credit expansion on a
given increase in reserves would be narrowed to the
extent that the special reserve was required. At
the m a x i m u m r e q u i r e m e n t proposed, it would he
lowered from six to one to nearly two and onehalf to one.
3. It would bring about an increase in interest
rates on private debt and would increase earnings
of the banks from this source where rates on loans
are comparatively low. It would accomplish this
purpose, moreover, without increasing the interest cost on the public debt or permitting unstable prices in the G o v e r n m e n t securities market.
T h e plan, in effect, would divorce the market for
private debt from the m a r k e t for G o v e r n m e n t
securities.
4. T h e plan would not rely on higher interest
rates to restrain private borrowing, but to the
extent higher interest rates restrain such borrowing, the proposal would m a k e use of the interest
rate mechanism. H e n c e , the cost of restraining
credit would be borne by private borrowers who
are incurring additional debt, and not by the
G o v e r n m e n t which is reducing its debt.
5. T h e main effect of the plan would be to reduce
the availability of bank credit. T h i s would he
accomplished by putting the restraint on the lend
ers, that is, the banks. "J"hey would be less willing
to sell G o v e r n m e n t securities in order to expand
credit because the a m o u n t of such liquid assets
as they held as secondary reserves could be greath
reduced by the requirement. Such an authority,

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

CAUSES A N D

CONTROLS

even without action being taken by the Reserve
authorities, would have a very restraining influence.
6. T h e plan would restore use of the customary
instruments of Reserve influence on bank credit
expansion, namely, discount rates and open market operations. Support of these instruments by
the special reserve requirement would enable the
Federal Reserve to m a k e it more difficult and
costly for banks to borrow Federal Reserve funds.
7. N o alterations in the b a n k i n g structure, in the
authority of the supervisors, in customary methods
of bank operations, or in established interbank relationships would be introduced as a result of
imposing .the requirement.
8. T h e banks would be left by the plan with
sufficient latitude to meet essential needs of the
economy for credit, and the public would be assured of a high degree of liquidity and safety for
the banking system.
Many bankers argue that this proposed requirement is unnecessary because the banks themselves
have a vital interest in the conservative extension of
credit, and will prevent excessive credit expansion as
a matter of ordinary b a n k i n g prudence. T h e banks,
however, are confronted by a situation in which
they can readily meet unlimited private credit demands and in which such d e m a n d s are vigorously
sustained by inflation while, at the same time, these
demands are contributing to inflation. T h e y are
both a cause and effect. T h e banks are not in a
position to refuse legitimate, sound credit d e m a n d s
of individual customers, and current loans, taken
separately, which in the light of the customer's
satisfactory credit risk, do appear to represent legitimate credit needs. But in accommodating these
credit demands freely, the banks as a system are
expanding bank deposits and a d d i n g to the money

supply.
F r o m the beginning of 1946 t h r o u g h October of
this year, the b a n k i n g system as a whole has increased its loans and investments—other than Treasury obligations—by an estimated 12 billion dollars.
This has added a like a m o u n t to the money supply,
which, together with gold acquisitions, is largely
responsible for an increase in privately held deposits
of 14 billion dollars.
Reconversion of the economy from war to peace
required aggresshe bank financing of agriculture,
commerce, and industry in order to facilitate the
earliest possible attainment of peacetime activity
on a much higher level than pre\ailed before the
war. Some of this bank credit expansion lor p r h a t e
purposes, therefore, was justified. H i g h levels of
peacetime actixity h a \ c long since been attained,

7

T H E CURRENT INFLATION

PROBLEM

however; yet, bank credit expansion is continuing
and in recent months has gained rapid momentum.
N o n e of us likes restraints. I am sympathetic
with the bankers who resent seeming to be singled
out for a special restraint on their wares, which
are loans and'investments. T o the uninformed, it
might appear that the banking system has been or
is now to blame for the oversupply of money. This
is not the case.
Instinctively and naturally, bankers do not relish
restrictions on their activities any more than labor
likes wage controls, or agriculture likes price ceilings. W e realize that the special reserve proposal
Which we consider the best alternative, after considering all oi the circumstances, will be very
strongly resisted by those bankers who fear that
it points accusingly at them, or that it is more regimentation, more bureaucratic reaching for power,
or an encroachment on State rights, or an opening
wedge to force nonmember banks into the Reserve
System. All these things have been said to us privately or publicly—and we can only say that if a
better alternative can be devised, we would welcome it.
The Board recommends that the administration
of the special reserve plan be placed in the Federal
Open Market Committee, whose members, in addition to the Reserve Board, are five presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks. This should help to
remove some of the misgivings of bankers.
T h e opposition of some very prominent bankers
to any new power for the Federal Reserve is expressed in a statement which they have asked me
to submit for the record. It is a statement of the
Federal Advisory * Council, composed of twelve
bankers, one from each Federal Reserve district.
Often we agree. In this case they unitedly oppose
the remedy we advocate. They contend that banks
are not indulging in inflationary expansion of
credit; that, therefore, the problem should be attacked on other fronts, and that no legislation is
required on the banking front. They differ with us
also in unanimously opposing reinstatement of instalment credit regulation.
I am sure the Council's views reflect the opinion
of a great many bankers, who are entirely sincere in the belief that the loans they are extending
are safe, deserving risks necessary to sustain full
production.
That conviction, honestly held, is
unhappily characteristic of boom psychology. In
1920, or in the latter part of that decade, bankers
would have made the same replies that they give
today if asked whether they thought the loans

8
Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

CAUSES A N D

CONTROLS

they were making should not be made. A short
time later they were trying desperately to liquidate
some of these loans. T h e individual banker is
judging by standards applying to the individual
borrower and risk.
T h e Reserve Board, the Congress, and all responsible for public policy must necessarily approach the whole problem from a diflhfent standpoint. The question we must ask is whether any
further expansion in the aggregate amount of
credit is desirable or dangerous. If it, in fact,
calls forth more production it will be desirable.
If it only permits one borrower to bid against another would-be buyer for scarce goods and thus
adds to upward pressures on prices, it is dangerous.
It is our best judgment that overall expansion of the
money supply at this time is inflationary and dangerous.
It is unfortunate, I think, that banking leaders
oppose protective measures against inflationary
forces arising in the credit field. They seem to
forget that in order to assist in war financing, the
Government provided the banking system with
additional reserves which enabled the banks to buy
Government securities; that this created new
deposits in the banks; and that banks have also had
the benefit of interest received on the Government
securities they have held and will continue to hold
for an indefinite period. They object even to a
temporary limitation on the further use of these
funds as a basis for loans to private borrowers,
which would in turn create more and more deposits.
The Government has an obligation and a duty to
step in at this time of national danger to say to
the banks, "We are not proposing to deprive you
of benefits you have already derived and will continue to derive from the vast increase in bank
deposits resulting from your purchases of Government securities, but we do say that you should
be willing to accept a reasonable limitation on
using a war-created situation to multiply private
loans in peacetime when they serve to intensify
inflationary pressures."
T o sum up, the proposed special reserve requirement is only a part, though a necessary part, of any
effective anti-inflationary program.
As I have
indicated, action on other fronts, by far the most
important of which is fiscal policy, is necessary to
the success of that program. And the need for
action on the monetary and credit front would be
reduced to the extent that needed action is taken
on other fronts.

