FO'R RELEASE UPON DELIVERY

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

ADDRESS ON THE BRITISH LOAN

^
MARRINER S . ECCLES
CHAIRMAN OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS
OF THE
FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM

AT A LUNCHEON
OF THE
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION

AT 1 2 : 3 0 P . M .
SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 9 , 19U6
BELLEVUE-STRATFORD HOTEL
PHILADELPHIA

The President of the United States has placed before the
Congress a set of proposals designed to establish our future economic
and financial relationships with the British Empire. Their most notable
feature is a large dollar loan to help the British to help themselves in
surmounting the difficulties which face them as a result of the war.
These proposals are the result of long and painstaking negotiations with
representatives of the British Government in wh\ch I had the honor to
participate. I was invited to come hore today to tell you why I believe
they represent a fair and honorable bargain; why they serve the interests
of the United States $ in fact, why they are an essential step on the road
to world peace and prosperity, and, therefore, why they should be adopted.
We do not need to look twice at the war-torn world around us to
realize what a tremendous job it will be to restore that world to peaceful and prosperous ways* We do not have to think twice about recent
history and the two World Wars which have fallen on us within a generation
to realize how vitally important this objective is to every one of us.
The world cannot be brought back to the paths of peace and economic welfare without strong, courageous leadership* Throughout the world this
country is looked to for that leadershipf
This country has a plan for economic peace. It is to the everlasting credit of this Government that in the midst of the most devastating
of all wars it nonetheless found energies to devote toward pl'anning for
the peace. We have given the world leadership by developing, in c
o
>
operation with our Allies, a positive program for economic 'recovery'ahd
reconstruction. We have taken two major steps toward laying the groundwork for a prosperous world economy.
The first was the Bretton Woods financial proposals which were
worked out at an international conference summoned more than a year ago
at the initiative of the United States. The second is the proposals- on
international trade and related matters which have been put forward by
the United States as the basis for discussion in international conferences
during the coming year. These two sets of proposals, one in the financial
and one in the trade sphere, complement each 'other. Both have a common
objectivej the development of "rules of the game" for international economic ^affairs. The.Bretton Woods Monetary Fund*aims at the abandonment
of artificial exchange restrictions and creates machinery for dealing with
international exchange rates. The United Stated proposals on commercial
policy SQek to eliminate unfair trade practices and'other barriers to
intemational commerce.
What are the prospects for getting the kind of an economic world
envisioned in these proposals? The outlook is indeed black unless we in
the United* States are prepared to do more than preach about world peace
and prosperity. We must be willing to back up our preachments with practical, cooperative proposals such as the ones I have just mentioned**

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

2 We all know what a desperate state the world is in today.
Great areas in Europe and the Far East have been left prostrate by the
war* Masses of people in tho world are hungry, not just for food (and
for every other kind of goods), but also for employment'and for social
and economic peace* Bread, work, and peacel Enlightened leadership
must" provide these essentials of a decent life through reasonable and
humone international arrangements, or desperate peoples will inevitably
yield to the glib promises of ambitious revolutionists, losing their
liberties in the hope of gaining economic security*
We need an orderly ecomomio recovery in the world for the sake
of political stability and social order* Poverty breeds international
rivalries and conflicts* In times like these, distressed nations are
tempted to make full use of every bargaining power and weapon that can
be brought to hand* Unless a positive program for regulating international economic relations is widely accepted, trading relations can
easily degenerate into a ruthless struggle for existence. An undeclared
state of economic warfare might rapidly develop among the world's leading
nations and economic blocs* In such an atmosphere ther'e would be no hope
for the United Nations Organization in bringing about a lasting peace*
In a very real sense, therefore, the Bretton Woods Agreements
and the United States1 proposals on commercial policy constitute treaties
of economic peace* At the preoent time, however, many countries cannot
afford to adhere to these treaties unless they receive some external
assistance*, ' In particular this is true of countries that suffered most
from the destruction of the war and have little or no capacity to earn
foreign exchange through exports until they have been rehabilitated.
Such countries must be given an opportunity to work their way out peace*
fully and avoid social and economic chaos. The-only satisfactory way
out is through longrterm credits, and our couxxtry stands almost alone in
the wor]<d in being able to grant these credits, and thereby supply essential
goods.
Against these reasons for our extending aid to foreign countries
we must .weigh the pressures on our own domestic economy*" We cannot ignore
the fact that such aid through Government-channels necessitates an increase
in public expenditures. However,' this increase is, by its terms, selfliquidating* The foreign borrowers will in effect assume the burden '
o
f
this increase in our expenditures by making interest a
f
t
d amortization payments on thQi,r loans* We must reoognize also that the expenditure of the
proceeds'of the loans in this country cannot be entirely welcomed at the
present time. Many of these purchases will be made for products of which
we will have an adequate^ or even a surplus, supply, but'inevitably other
purchases, will be for goods that are., for thfc time being at'least, in short
supply, and, to that extent such purchases add to inflationary pressures.

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

- 3So we must face up to the alternatives. We must weigh the advantages to the United States of a contribution to v/orid stability against
the costs which such,a contribution imposes on us at home. No American
doubts that we ought to make some contribution in money and in goods to
the relief and reconstruction of the shattered world* At one end pf the
scale we have UNRRA.. to which by common consent we are donating large
amounts of money and goods in order to provide emergency relief for destitute* peoples* We all recognize the necessity for this, despite the drain
whiqh the UNRRA procurement program may exert on some of our domestic
markets* At the other end of the scale, there are all kinds of grandiose
prefects which foreign countries would like to undertake with assistance
from this country,.but which are beyond our ability to provide and would
not be in our interest to undertake* In between, however, lies a range
of loan propositions of varying degrees of urgency and importance* These
must be examined case by case with a view to making a determination based
on our ability and our national interest* This was ray approach to the
British problem in the recent negotiations* Our proposed action in the
specific British case must be judged in the light of its importance to the
success of our whole foreign economic policy*
The British case is unique* More than any other country in the
world Britain is dependent for her existence upon foreign trade* She is
the world*s largest importer and the pound sterling, after the dollar, is
by far the most important currency in world trade* British trade and exchange practices, therefore, have an immense influence on all of the markets
of the world* The .construction of a liberal world trading system along the
lines desired by the United States would be virtually impossible without
British collaboration. To my mind, therefore, the basic justification for
the loan is that it would make it. possible for Britain to join with us in
laying the foundation for economic peace through the Bretton Woods program.
Nowf let's look a little closer at the British case to see why
Britain needs the proposed sum of. $31750• 000*000 to carry her through the
postwar period* ,She was getting along before the war* Living on her
capital a little, perhaps, but a country with very great resources measured
by peacetime standards* Howevert Britain has.just emerged from six years
of life-and-death struggle in which she has been forced to make-tremendous
human and material sacrifices* As a result* she faces enormously difficult
problems.
The war has gravely crippled Britain's means of international
trade on which her livelihood depends* The British Isles are a great workshop which must import large quantities of food and raw materials merely to
exist* Before the war the British paid for these imports partly through
exports, partly through the provision of shipping and other services to the
world, and partly by drawing income from large foreign investments built up
through centuries of effort by the British people* > Today the impqrt re*
quirements persist despite the austere lev^l of British living standards.
But what has happened-to Britain's capacity to pay?

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

-h In the first place, her export trade is almost gone and must
largely be rebuilt. Why? Primarily because Britain has concentrated her
energies so. fully on the war*. Production for war was given priority over
production for export, except where exports served to bolster the war
effort of Allied countries. We were partners in this conversion of the
British workshop to war purposes. We made large supplies available to
Britain on Lend-I^ease. We, of course, did not insist on repayment in
British goods at the expense of her wa,r production* But when the flow
of Lend-Lease supplies was abruptly terminated at the end of the war,
this fruitful partnership wets dissolved* The main burdon of* provisioning
the British Isles had to be taken over by British exports, which were reduced in 19U5 to only JO' per cent of the prewar level* This 'burden is
manageable in time,, but it nay be three or four years before Britain can
sufficiently restore her export trade to enable her again to be selfsupporting.
Britain will also resume her place in time as a great provider
of shipping, insurance, and banking services to the world* But these
activities, too, have been shattered by the war. British shipping in
particular suffered tremendous war losses*
The war, brought about a radical change in Britain's international
investment position. Once the largest creditor country in the world, she
has been reduced to a net debtor through her prpsecution of the war* In
order to pay f
,
o
r imports and for her large military expenditures abroad,
she has liquidated nearly 5 billion dollars wortft Of foreign assets since
1959 &nd has incurred foreign debts of more, tk&n 12 billion dollars*
Quite naturallyJJ the British have argued that they deserve our
assistance in digging out of their difficulties as much as in fighting
the war itself. They were hopeful that we would help them through the postwar transition period on something like Lend-Lease terms — that we would
view the help as part of our share in the cost of the common victory over
the enemy and in constructing the p.eace* We on the U. S# side have agreed
to deal on this basis in settling for, Lend-Lease suppli-es consumed in the
prosecution of the war. But postwar assistance, we h&ve felt, should be
extended on a self-liquidating basis. We were impressed by Britain's
sacrifice, but we felt that the provision of new money had to be based on
future rather than past considerations and, therefore, could not be a gift
but must be a loan, to be repaid over a period of years and bearing interest
at a rp/te sufficient to cover approximately%the* cost of the money to the
United States Treasury* The American attitude was summed'up by Lord Keynes
in the speech which he delivered in the HousetoftLords last December* "We
soon discovered," he told his countrymen, "that it wu§s not our past performance, or our present weakness, but our future prospects of recovery and
our intention to face'the world boldlysthat we had to demonstrate* Our
American friends were interested not in our wounds though incurred in the
common couse, but in our convalescence. To help that forward interests
them much more than to comfort a war victim."

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

- 5l
A
/
h
e
n this basic question of a. loan was decided upon, and when
agreement was reached on firm commitments by the British with regard to
the'ir tracle and exchange policies, the final step was to determine how
large a loan was necessary to do the job. How much foreign exchange
would,, the British.need to meet urgent expenditures during the period when
they were getting back on their feet? How much would' they need to pay
foreign countries supplying the British market in sterling fully convertible into dollars and other currencies rather than in frozen funds?
How much of this foreign exchange could they still draw from their own
resources? How much of the load could.be carried by other countries
(Canada, for example), and what amount needed to be raised in the United
States if the job was to be done? A H these factors were closely ex-*
amined* This figure of $3.750,000,000 was not picked out of the air.
It represents the careful judgment of our negotiators as to the minimum
amount the British need from us to work their way out'of the present
situation, while at the same time they continue to subject themselves
to an austere standard of living at home. The propose^ loan amounts to
what we spent in only two woeks of fighting a war of death a
r
i
d destruction*
In contrast, it seems little enough to loan in the interest of peac£.
Moreover, this loan is to meet Britain's minimum import needs
and not to pay .off her other creditors* As I mentioned before, as a result of her war purchases abroad, Britain owes some 12 billion dollars*
About half of this is owed to India and countries of the Middle East
where the British had to finance heavy military expenditures during the
war, She plans to negotiate settlements ojx these debts involving
cancellation of part and repayment of -the rest over a long period of years*
Our loan agreement with Britain provides that she must settle these debts
out of resources otaer than our line of credit*
If we make the loan, what of its future? Can the British repay
it? Can Britain and other foreign countries which share in our emergency
postwar lending program live up to their obligations,?
The answer is that they can repay if world trade is restored to
a healthy basis and if we in this country take the lead in maintaining a
high level of production and employment* They canft repay if the world
breaks up in warring economic blocs or falls into another severe world
depression* The essence of these loans is to create the conditions under
which they can be repaid.
Loans, however, are not enough* The restoration of a healthy
world trade also depends on whether we in this country learn how to administer our international economic affairs* There is an old, but often
forgotten, axiom — that we cannot forever export more than we import*
This year •
*
- perhaps for several years -w we face an emergency situation*
During this period we must plan for large export surpluses in order to
assist the world in recovering from the wreckage of wart But let's not
lose sight of the reasons which justify this action* Above allf let's not

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

-6 make the mistake of thinking that lending money to finance exports is
the way to take care of unemployment when it develops* We shall'deceive
ourselves if we imagine that we can continuously*-sell abroad more than
we buy* By accepting gold *(of which we already have an abundance) or
promises to pay, we can, of course, delude ourselves for* a time into
thinking that our foreign trade is on a solid and lasting basis. We
get employment, yes, while the money is being spent, but the fruits of
that employment are lost to us permanently if we persist in refusing
to take goods and services from foreign countries to enable them to
service and repay their debts. 4If we desire to maintain a thriving export business and receive service on our investments abroad,, we must
make the exchange of goods and services a two-way street. In the end,
responsibility for making it possible* for* our debtors to pay is ours,
and ours alone.
We should never forget that this country does not have unlimited natural resources. 'We have been exploiting our mines, our
forests, oui* oil reserves, at a rapid rate. It is bad enough if we
squander these resources in supporting ourselves at-home.. It is much
worse if we dissipate them by pushing them out in exports and fail to
provide for repayment. As we look for ways to restore our balance of
international trade, we should devote special attention to the possiT
bility of replenishing our reserves of scarce of*irreplaceable raw materials by drawing upon the resources of the outside world.
There are some, as you knoxv, who will let past grievances blind
them to all reasons for granting this help to the' British people — who
remember only the worst and forget what the finest British character has
contributed through ttie centuries to the institutions of free men and
the liberation of the human spirit —* who even now forget how this ancient,
hardy people so recently stood alone through the long', dark night, the
only barrier between this country and the onrush of the Axis powers over
peoples less resolute. The'good sense of the American people will not
let these dissenting voices prevail, if for no other reason than that
our Nation cannot afford, in'its own-long-run -irltorest, to refuse the
help.

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

