ADDRESS AT THE
TAX INSTITUTE SYMPOSIUM
IN NEW YORK CITY, FEBHJARY 8, I9 bk

BY

MARRINER S» ECCLES
CHAIRMAN OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS
OF THE
FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM

.POSSIBILITIES OF POSTWAR INFLATION AND SUGGESTED TAX ACTION

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

For release in afternoon newspapers
of Tuesday, February 8, 19l b

POSSIBILITIES OF POSTWAR INFLATION AND SUGGESTED TAX ACTION

Your Chairman asked m
e to disouss taxation from the standpoint k f
controlling inflation in the postwar period* I fe e l that the subject would
be incomplete unless "l took account also of the importance of taxation as a
means of controlling deflation« Taxation is never neutral in its economic
effeots, and since the war, i t has been more and more generally recognized
■that even i f levied ostensibly fo r revenue only, taxes have a direct in­
fluence on those basic factors of consumption, savings, and investment which,
by getting out of balance, produce economic ups and downs* It is appro­
priate to discuss these matters in this forum. I t is important to consider
wiiat type and what amount of taxation w ill best help to keep the economy
moving ahead on an even keel when the war ends and looking to the longer
future.
At the same time, i t is of paramount importance not to lose sight
of the stark' fact that we are s t i l l in the midst of this war. It is not
yet won. No m
an can say when i t w ill end* No m
an can say «hat i t w ill cost
in blood said resources before i t ends. The imperative neods of this hour
are more determined and united e ffo rt, more manpower, more taxation and more
restraints. I f in the discussions of the postwar world — in the debates
going on a l l over this oountry about postwar plans and problems — we blind
ourselves or others to the urgent necessities of this war, i f our w i ll as a
nation to exert every effo rt to achieve an early victory is in any way
weakened by thinking too m
uch about our dollars in the future and too l i t t l e
about our duties now, we w ill have done our country, and ourselves, a grave
disservice.
Proper fis c a l policies are, of course, essential to the successful
management of our war economy. They w i ll be equally essential to a f u l l
u tilizatio n of our resources la te r on. In bringing the problems of fis c a l
policy before the public, your Institute is making an important contribution
towards the promotion of those policies which should contribute to the
successful financing of this war and to the maintenance thereafter of the
institutions which our armed forces are fighting to preserve.
Our home front fig h t against inflation w ill have to continue fo r
a considerable time a fter the war ends. The eventual answer to the in-*
fla tio n problem must be found in the production of goods in quantities
sufficient to meet a ll the demand, but that w ill not be possible until
industry has been able to resume f u ll peacetime .production and has been
able to supply the most urgent backlog needs. In the meantime we w ill s t i l l
be confronted with a situation in which individual and business consumers,
i f permitted to buy fre e ly , would in many fie ld s try to purchase greatly in
excess of what is available. Thus the pressure on many prioes w i ll con­
tinue* In order to assure orderly transition to a high and stable level of
production and employment in the postwar period, i t is absolutely essential
that further price increases be prevented. This cannot be done without main-

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

-

2

-

taining wartime taxes, wage controls and also rationing and price controls
over essential goods until such time as the supply is sufficient to meet
demand. Also, control of goods for export should be maintained for some
time.
I shall not undertake to restate my views on war finance, but in
discussing the problems of inflation control after the war, we must realize
that the chances for success at that time will be vitally affected by
fisoal policies during the war. Our tax effort so far has been entirely
inadequate in relationship to our huge wartime expenditures and it has
lagged far behind that of our allies. A family man with an income of
$5*000, for instance, pays $75b of income taxes in the United States (in­
cluding State income tax at the rate 'paid in New York State) as against
$1,655 in the United Kingdom or $1,7U7 in Canada« Not only is the present
level of income taxes much higher in these two countries, but the increase
over prewar taxes has also been much sharper. In addition, the American
pays considerably less in sales and excise taxes than does the taxpayer in
either of the two other countries.
A few illustrations will show the relationship of the current war
financing program to postwar developments. For every dollar of income
currently received in the United States, less than 65 cents worth of con­
sumers* goods are currently available for purchase, and for every dollar
of disposable income which is left to the consumer after the payment of his
personal taxes, there are less than 75 cents worth of goods that can be
bought. Our failure to accept a substantial inorease in taxes at this time
thus leaves us with an excess of consumers* income which greatly increases
the difficulties of effective rationing and of holding the line against
further wage and price increases. We should strengthen in every way possible
our stabilization program during the war period, since it will be impossible
to do so after the war, when the impulse of the people to return to normalcy
will make it very difficult even to maintain established controls.
Another difficulty which will confront us in the postwar period
will arise from the huge amount of purchasing power held by the public.
This will largely be the result of our heavy reliano» upon borrowing in the
financing of our war expenditures, and, in particular, upon borrowing from
the banks. In the two years from January 1, 19k2 to January 1, 1914+, the
public debt increased by 105 billion dollars, and of this increase the com­
mercial banks and the Federal Reserve Banks have absorbed i
+
8 billion dollars.
Of the total of 169 billion dollars of Government debt outstanding at the
end of 191*3» 72 billions were held by the commercial banks and the Federal
Reserve. This extensive borrowing from the banks resulted in a correspond­
ing increase i
n
i our money supply. Including currency as well as demand
deposits, the total money supply held by the public at the close of the
year amounted to over 80 billion dollars, or nearly twice as much as two
years ago. To this must be added over 30 billion dollars of time deposits
and the many billions of U. S. Government securities held by the public.
This huge volume of liquid funds is the basis for the inflationary problem
in the transition period.

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

-

3 -

In turning our attention to the transition problem, we would do
well to remember what happened after the last war. The collapse of Germany
came unexpectedly. It was followed by an abrupt termination of war pre­
duction. Prompt abandonment of price controls after the Armistice, record
agricultural exports, heavy inventory accumulations and high consumers' de­
mand led to the sharp price advances of 1919 and 1920, wixich, in turn, paved
the way for tbe postwar depression. This time the transition problem will
be immensely greater. War expenditures in 1918 amounted to only 16 billion
dellars as against 90 billion dollars now. Then, only one-fourth of all
geods produced by the economy were for war purposesj now, the war absorbs
about one-half of our total output. We need to be far more successful this
time in solving the problem. Early resumption of peacetime production by
some industries, if properly planned, could help to remove bottlenecks in
the reconversion of other industries later on. A gradual demobilization of
the services would greatly reduoe the danger of flooding the labor market
in the earlier stages of reconversion. Should the Pacific war continue for
some time after the fall of Germany, a more gradual tapering off of war
production and demobilization of the armed forces would, of course, be
possible than would be the case if the Axis were to collapse simultaneously
on all frontsr
But, we cannot depend upon the Axis to time its collapse to suit
our economic convenience. Rather, we must prepare for the most speedy re­
turn of industry to peacetime production whenever military requirements
permit. We must stand ready to meet inflationary pressures while this shift
is being accomplished. A speedy conversion to peacetime production is the
most direct and effective way to cope with the inflation problem. On in­
dustry's part, this requires advance planning for the return to an expanded
production so that a high level of employment can be maintained with the
least possible interruption» It is important that the expansion of industry
should be only in those fields where it is justified by the promise of a
permanent market. Expansion should be avoided where it would merely serve
to meet a temporary high level of demand arising from the huge backlog of
deferred purchases. This backlog should be met gradually. Otherwise, excess
capacity would be oreated which would accentuate the inflation danger during
the transition period and the danger of deflation later on. On the Govern­
ment’s part, an orderly and expeditious transition requires the setting up
of effective machinery for the prompt termination-and payment of amounts
due on outstanding contracts, for the disposition of inventories and
Government-owned facilities needed in peacetime production and for assuring
an ample credit supply. If claims against outstanding Government contracts
are settled promptly, the credit position of business on the whole will be
very strong. However, there are a few large e n t e r p r i s e s and many small
businesses which will be in need of funds, either in the form of credit,
equity capital, or both. A H necessary steps should be taken to assure
that these needs will be met. The funds should be supplied as far as
possible from private sources with such Government assistance as may be
required.

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

- h Even though we may succeed in resuming peacetime production
rapidly, there w ill s t i l l be a period of heavy inflationary pressures due
to the desire of consumers to satisfy their deferred demands, and the re­
quirements of business fo r supplies to take care of deferred maintenance
and improvements and to restock inventories. Heavy export demands w ill
also continue. I t is most important that prices be held from the outset
and that the public be confident of this policy. We must give assurance
to the millions of bondholders that they w i ll not lose by delaying their
purchases until ample supplies aro again available. I f wartime savings
are used gradually a fte r industry has returned to- a peacetime basis, they
can contribute greatly to the maintenance of prosperity. But i f spent too
rapidly, the savings would be dissipated in higher prices and would under­
mine the foundations of the economy.
There can be no doubt, therefore, that inflation controls should
be maintained during this transition period. Continued rationing and pri«e
controls w i ll be needed in the domestic market, and licensing control of
exports should be retained* Wartime taxes should be kept up, including the
excess profits tax* although i t may be desirable to reduce the present 95
per cent rate to, say, 75 per cent, in order to encourage efficiency,
economy and increased production. The drastic reduction of expenditures
which w ill take place w i ll not ju s t ify a premature reduction of taxes. O
n
the contrary, every attempt should be made to bring about a balanced budget
at the e a rlie st possible date after the war. It is unlikely that the
public w ill be absorbing additional Government securities during that
period, but w ill be tending to s e ll on balance some of its holdings. Un­
less the budget is balanced, the banks would not only have to absorb possi­
ble sales by nonbank holders, but would also have to absorb the new issues
needed to finance the d e fic it, thus aggravating the inflationary situation
by further increasing the already excessive supply of money. A balanced
budget, on the other hand, w ill encourage the owners of Government bonds
to retain their holdings because i t w ill assure them that the purchasing
power of their money, invested in bonds, w ill be preserved.
After the war is won and industry has been fu lly readjusted to
a peacetime basis, American enterprise w ill meet its greatest challenge,
namely, to provide peacetime production on a scale commensurate with the
enormous a b ility to produce which our economy has demonstrated during the
war years. This w ill mean tiie employment of at least 55 m illion people, as
compared with I4
.6 million in 19Í+0, when more people were employed than in any
previous year. At 1
9
i
t
3 prices, this means a gross national product of
about l60 b illio n dollars, or close to
b illio n dollars more than in 191+0.
To meet this challenge, we must realize that a high level of
employment and income requires a high level of expenditures, private or
public. W
e have seen during the war years how greatly our national product
can be increased i f there is sufficient demand fo r the country’ s output.
After the transition has been made, we shall be able to maintain a high
level of output only i f a vast increase in peacetime expenditures replaces

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

-

5 -

a large part of the war outlays. Business w ill not be able to supply a
product of 160 b illio n dollars unless there is a corresponding demand by
the economy as a whole. Dem
and w ill not be sufficient unless business
distributes its iribome to the people, and unless the people return their
incomes to enterprise in the purchase of its goods and services. This
means, f i r s t of a l l , maintenance of a high volume of wages. The aggregate
of buying power must be maintained, although some wages may have to be ad­
justed downward and others upward. This buying power must then bo returned
to the economy through a high level of consumption expenditures, Of course,
not a ll income w ill be spent on consumption. There w i ll be savings both by
individuals and by business enterprises. We can have saving and a high level
of income and employment i f the savings are invested in the improvement and
expansion of our economy. When savings are thus spent upon the production
of new fa c ilit ie s of a l l kinds, they provide income and employment. But
when savings are held id le , or used to bid up the prices of existing assets,
they are not returned to production and other dollars must take their place
i f employment is to be maintained. The basic condition fo r economic pros­
perity is thus a steady stream of consumer, business and public expenditures
at a volume sufficien t to employ a l l who desire to work. The more fu lly
private enterprise succeeds in providing the necessary volume of income and
expenditures, the less necessary i t w ill be fo r Government — Federal, State
and local — to provide supplementary employment.
The contribution which monetary policy can make to the goal of
m
axim
um production and employment is limited. The banking system and the
capital market must provide adequate funds to meet the credit and capital
neesjs of the country. Merely making funds available, however low the cost,
w ill not induce expansion unless business is assured of a market fo r its
increased production. O
n the other hand, the impact of fis c a l policies on
the spending stream is fa r more direct and powerful. Revenue measures and
public expenditures can either increase or decrease the income stream. The
Government can so shape and time its tax and expenditure policies as to o ff­
set variations in the income stream due to variations in the volume of
private expenditures. By wise policy, correctly timed, Government can thus
be a balance wheel and a stabilizin g influence in helping to maintain a high
level of production and employment. Taxation, therefore, has become m
uch
more than a problem merely of meeting tho. fis c a l needs of the Treasury» It
is also a major concern of national economic policy.
. There is much discussion currently about incentive taxation, as
if it were a panacea. Every taxpayer, individual or corporate, is inclined
to think that the best incentive would bo to reduce his own taxes. Thus,
the argument for tax incentives readily develops into an argument for
greatly reduced taxes for everybody. Greatly reducing everybody’s taxes,
however, is not the way to maintain a balanced budget, as we certainly should
do when we have a high level of employment. It is likely that the Federal
postwar budget will be well above 20 billion dollars annually. Therefore,
wholesale tax reductions are out of the question if we are to maintain a
balanced budget, and such tax reductions as we can afford must be applied in

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

-

6

-

a way that w ill contribute most to the maintenance of employment«
The question is not so m
uch one of incentives as of objectives.
I f we are to have a high level of national income, then, as I have indi­
cated, we must have a high level of consumption outlays. The most
important consideration, therefore, is that taxes should interfere as
l i t t le as possible with the flow of consumer expenditures. The f i r s t
step towards this end is to reduce indirect taxes on consumption and, i f
necessary, to substitute direct taxes on income. Indirect taxes are added
to the price which the consumer must pay. The greater the sales tax, the
fewer goods the customer cin buy, and the less he can buy, the less tiie
business m
an can s e ll. That, in turn, means less employment. At the same
time, sales taxes penalize those who consume a large share of their income.
There is thus a strong case fo r a drastic reduction in Federal sales and
excise taxes just as soon as the supply of consumer goods on the whole be­
gins to exceed the demand» This condition is not lik ely to be reached un­
t i l the backlog of deferred consumer demand has been met. The personal
income tax should be the main source of Federal revenue in the postwar
period beoause i t is the most fle x ib le and equitable type of taxation,
and because consumption is less affected by i t .
Another important step in maintaining the flow of consumption
expenditures would be to expand the social security program, including
unemployment insurance, provision fo r old age, d isa b ility and other
hazards. Coverage should bo broadened, payments liberalized, and in the
case of unemployment insuranoe, the period of payment should be lengthened.
Providing an adequate old-age pension and extonding i t to cover everyone
would enable a great many more people to re tire , and this w i ll assist in
meeting the unemployment problem. Through provisions of this kind, a
feeling of security is given to people generally and they are thus put in
a position where they w ill feel free to spend a larger share of their
current income, thereby contributing to tbe maintenance of employment.
Postwar tax policy w i ll also have to be concerned with the flow
of capital expenditures. In m
uch of the current discussion, the deterrent
effects of taxation upon business spending are exaggerated. Low taxes on
business w ill not bring about a high level of capital expenditures i f the
demand fo r the products of business does not ju stify such expenditures.
I f demand does ju stify the expenditures, even high taxes w ill not keep
businesses from expanding to meet the demand, unless they are subject to
excessively high tax rates. The existence of markets fo r their products,
rather than taxation, is the decisive factor, particularly in the case of
large and w ell established enterprises, such as those in the steel, o i l,
automobile and chemical industries, among others. Present corporation tax
laws have given considerable postwar protection to those concerns which have
made excess profits by providing a postwar credit of 10 per cent of their
excess profits tax, as w ell as a provision fo r the carry-back and carry­
forward fo r two years of unused excess profits credits and of net operating
losses* This is a tax incentive to business which already exists.

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

-

7 -

The effect of taxes on many of the small enterprises and on
the establishment of new enterprises is another matter and needs to be
given particular consideration. Perhaps the most important tax de­
terrent results from the fact that income is taxable under the corpora­
tion income tax, and i t is again taxable under the personal income tax
when i t is distributed as dividends to the owners, This procedure has a
number of harmful results. It places a premium on fixed debt finnncing
and a penalty upon equity capital since the corporation may deduct
interest as a cost item in computing its taxable income, while no such
deduction is allowed fo r the return to stockholders on equity capital.
It would greatly help to secure a less vulnerable business structure i f
more financing were done with equity capital and less with debt forms,
Because of the existing situation, investors are reluctant to supply
equity funds, particularly to small and new enterprises which are more
risky than the larger, w ell-established enterprises. The personal income
taxes upon dividends, particularly when subject to the higher surtaxes,
are an inducement to stockholders with large incomes, who influence
corporation policies, to prevent distribution of corporate earnings,
This situation is lik ely to be detrimental to the maintenance of employ­
ment because corporations are thus led to retain earnings beyond what is
needed and, therefore, they are not returned to the spending stream.
Equity investment and the distribution of corporate earnings
would be greatly encouraged by adopting a plan somewhat sim ilar to the
British method of dealing with dividend income, One effective method
would be to give a tax credit to the person who receives the dividends.
A tax would be collected from the corporation as now, but when dividends
are distributed, the stockholder would be permitted to take a credit on
his personal income tax of some substantial fixed percentage of his
dividend income. Another method would be to give the corporation a
similar fixed percentage oredit fo r that portion of its earnings which
i t distributes to stockholders. Either method would greatly reduce the
amount of double taxation on equity capital and would be a strong incentive
to new equity investments.
I think we should consider whether it would help in stabilizin g
the business structure to continue some form of excess profits tax, to­
gether with lib e ra l provision fo r carry-forward and carry-back of the ex­
cess profits tax oredit, and also make more lib e ra l provision for carrying
forward and carrying back losses than is now made in the tax law. Such
provisions would be particularly helpful to small and new enterprises.
W
e must encourage the establishment of new enterprises and safeguard the
great number of existing small enterprises i f we are to obtain a fle x ib le
and competitive business structure and halt the movement tending toward
increasingly large combines and monopolies. Another most important step
in this connection would be the establishment of patent pools freely
available to small and new enterprises as well as to others.

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

- 8 -

There are numerous other problems, such as changes in the
personal income tax which the limits of time do not perajit m
e to con­
sider. Our postwar tax 'structure must be fle x ib le and adaptable to the
changing requirements of fis c a l policy. Tax policy must be recognized
as part of a fle x ib le fis c a l system and must be used wisely to supplement
or curtail the flow of consumer and business spending as conditions re­
quire.
Underlying a l l that I have said is the fundamental purpose of
avoiding either inflation or deflation — in other words, what we would
a l l like to have is f u l l and sustained production and employment. The
discussions before this Tax Institute — very properly — center around
the role that taxation plays or should play in seeking this goal.
Specifically I was asked to discuss taxation as a means of controlling
in flation . I want to conclude what I have to say with this observation —
nothing that can be done now or later to the tax structure, nothing that
we can do now or la te r in any way, w ill contribute as m
uch to the control
of inflation — and what is in fin ite ly more important, the saving of
lives — as to unite a ll of our efforts and our energies to bring about
victory in this war at the earliest possible moment* That is why I under­
took to emphasize at the outset the overwhelming importance of keeping a l­
ways in the forefront of our vision our duties now rather than our dollars
later — fo r i f we f a i l in the performance of our duties now, i f we f a i l
to do a ll that each of us individually and collectively as a nation can do
to achieve an early victory, our plans and our hopes w ill never bo realized.

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

