BOARD OF GOVERNORS
OF THE
FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM

Statement for the Press

March 24, 1941,

The attached letter by Chairman Eccles is for release in
morning newspapers of Tuesday, March 25, 1941.

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

BOARD DF GDVERNDRB
DF THE

FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
WASHINGTON
A D D R E S S OFFICIAL C O R R E S P O N D E N C E
TO T H E BOARD
*$*IJ*M.X}^

March 21, 1941

Dear Mr, Patman:
From time to time my attention has been called to your
frequent public utterances on the floor of the House and over the
radio, culminating in your recent radio address as printed in the
Congressional Record of March 17, 1941. You have long charged
that the Federal Reserve System is under the domination of the
private bankers of the country and more recently you have proposed
that the government finance its entire expenditures through the
issue of new money and without the payment of interest. Since
these questions are of increasing importance in these times, I
feel that your statements should not remain unanswered lest the
public be misled into supposing that the issue by the government
of interest-bearing bonds is unnecessary, extravagant and wasteful,
as you contend. lour propositions concern matters in which I have
an especial interest and for the purposes of the record I am making
this personal reply. While I have no reason to believe that the
Board ' would differ with the substance of this letter,, it has not
been submitted to the other members and therefore does not necessarily represent their views.
• Your plan as described in the Congressional Record is
for the government to finance its expenditures by issuing new money
and avoiding the payment of interest. In this fashion you would
have the government meet not only its normal expenditures in excess of receipts but also the enormous defense expenditures now
under way and in contemplation and ultimately the entire outstanding Federal debt.
The sovereign power of the Congress to authorize such a
program is beyond question. What has to be determined, however,
is whether it would be for the good of the country to embark on
such a course. To my mind it would be disastrous. Plausible as
your proposals may be made to appear, there is no escape from the
truth that someone must pay for everything. If the government
could save the billion or more a year without causing any corresponding or greater losses to the country, no one could reasonably
be opposed to your proposal* I am convinced, however, that the
creation of the huge amount of new money contemplated by your plan
could only lead to incalculable losses for the country as a whole.

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

~ 2 -

At the outset I think it necessary to dispose of some of
your misconceptions on the subject of the banking system. First
of all, the interest received by the commercial banks of the country on their government bond holdings is not an unconscionable
tribute, as one might imply from your discussion. The banking system of the country is an indispensable part of our capitalistic
economy. Practically all the people make use of some banking service, either directly,or indirectly. HOY/-would these people be affected by your proposal? If the revenue from government bond holdings should be taken from the banks, they vyould seek some other
source of revenue to replace it or reduce their disbursements. Obviously they could not raise their lending rates, since the huge
amount of new money involved in your plan would drive interest rates
even below their present low levels. The banks would be obliged to
reduce still further the rate of interest paid on their savings accounts although the savers of the country are n
o
v
t
f
- receiving an excessively low rate of return. Beyond that, the banks would have to
increase materially their service charges of various kinds, principally for checking accounts. These efforts to replace the revenue
now derived from interest on government securities would impose a
new burden upon the people of the country substantially in the same
amount as the interest now received by the banks on their government bond holdings. There is this important difference, however,
that the new burden upon savers and other individuals using banking
services would fall most heavily upon the more numerous owners of
small accounts whereas the burden of taxes collected by the Federal
government to pay interest on its bonds falls for the most part upon
those with ability to pay.
Nor can it be truthfully said that banks make inordinate
profits, and that they could operate on a sound basis with less income. During the ten-year period 1950-1939 the average rate of net
earnings on invested capital by member banks was 2 per cent, which
is less than a reasonable rate of return. It should be noted that
these earnings relate only to banks which survived the great depression. A complete picture would show that during the period 1929-1933
inclusive, 9,755 banks failed and their stockholders in nearly every
instance lost their entire investment and in many cases paid assessments up to the par value of their stock. During the five-year period 1935-1959 the average rate of return was 6.1 per cent, but this
better showing was due in large part to the fact that during thispcriod banks were realizing recoveries on losses charged off during
the depression and profits on the sale of securities in a steadily
rising bond market. Obviously, these are non-rocurring items, without which the earnings for this recent five-year period would have
been substantially lower.
That the banking business is not considered lucrative by
the investing public is attested by the fact that during 1940 the
average price of common stocks of nineteen New York banks was about
55 per cent of the corresponding prices in 1926, whereas public

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

- 3 ~

utilities stock prices averaged around 80 per cent and industrials
around 100 per cent of the corresponding prices in 1926.
The effect of your proposals upon mutual savings «b*rues, .
life insurance companies, educational endowments and other institutional investors who hold government bonds would be even worse
because these institutions would have great difficulty in making
up the loss of revenue• They would be compelled to reduce drastically their disbursements. Savings banks would have to reduce
still further the rate of interest paid on their accounts> life
insurance companies wrould have to curtail dividends on outstanding
policies and charge higher premiums for future policies, and educational endowments would be forced to decrease their support of
schools and colleges.
One of your favorite complaints is that the Federal Reserve Banks are owned by private bankers and that the Board of Governors in Washington as well as the Federal Reserve Banks are
operated in the interest of private bankers. These charges will
not stand up under examination. The Board of Governors, the members of which are appointed by the President and confirmed by the
Senate, is a public body. As to the Federal Reserve Banks, you
rest your case upon the slender point that the stock of the Federal Reserve Banks is owned by the member banks. Congress specifically provided for this, as well as for the rate of dividend and
Congress can change the nature of the stock and the rate of return
at will. This so-called stock ownership, however, is more in the
nature of an enforced subscription to the capital of the Federal
Reserve Banks than an ownership in the usual sense. The stock cannot be sold, transferred or hypothecated, nor can it be voted in accordance with the par value of the shares held. Thus the smallest
member bank has an equal vote with the largest. Member banks have
no right to participate in earnings above the statutory dividend,
and upon liquidation any funds remaining after retirement of the
stock revert to the government. You greatly exaggerate the significance of this so-called stock ownership. At the current dividend
rate of six per cent, it involves the payment annually of approximately $8,000,000 to more than 6,000 member banks, and could be done
away with altogether without important effects except to put an end
to an illusion created by you and others in the minds of some people.
At the same time, it is my view that the Federal Reserve System
should be unequivocally a public instrumentality but the ownership
of the stock of the Federal Reserve Banks is not the determining
factor.
Coming to the principal issues involved in jrour proposal
to issue a constant stream of new money to finance the government,
the reasons why this would be contrary to the public interest may
be summarized as follows: (l) borrowing by the government at interest, particularly the borrowing of money actually saved by consumers, rather than issuance of currency, is a necessary safeguard

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

~ 4 against inflation, particularly at this time, and (2) borrowing by
the government at interest is an essential part of the capitalist,
economy in which we live.
There are times when the money supply should be increased
and times when it should not be. It is one of the tasks of the Federal Reserve System to see that the money supply is adjusted to current requirements of the economic situation. The System has powers
to supply almost unlimited increases, but its powers to prevent harmful increases or to bring about needed decreases are no?/ wholly inadequate .
The prevailing situation, which is likely to continue during the next few years, does not call for increases in the available
supply of money. The amount of adjusted demand deposits and currency, which together constitute the supply of money owned by the
public, already exceeds $42 billions or more than double the amount
that existed in 1933 and- some $15 billions more than was on hand at
the peak *f the boom period of the twenties. A large part of these
deposits represents idle funds being held on demand for future investment. In addition, commercial banks of the country have over
$6 billions of reserve funds in excess of their requirements and
available as a basis for a multiple expansion of loans and investments and therefore of deposits. In fact, existing deposits, If
utilized at the rate of turnover that prevailed in the twenties,
could support a tremendous boom without creation of an additional
dollar of new money.
With prospects for improved business under the stimulus
of the defense program, it is probable that individuals and institutional investors will find greater demands for their now idle lendable funds, and that these funds will be put to more active use. In
the first place, idle funds will be lent to the government for its
defense expenditures, and this will unavoidably put them into active
circulation. Then, as business improves, idle funds will be put to
use by large and small business units raising new capital. Even beyond this, as prosperity grows, individuals themselves vdll put into
circulation part of their accumulated cash savings by buying goods
and services of one kind and another, the purchase of which they
postponed in the past Y/hcn they accumulated those cash savings. It
is possible that this expansion of the use of existing funds may go
so far that, added on to the present rate of turnover of money and
goods and services, it may exceed the productive capacity of our
economic system* Such a condition is one of monetary Inflation,
characterized by attempts to buy things that cannot be bought, that
is, by the bidding up of prices of. goods, of equities, and of other
property—in other words by the usual phenomena of general inflation•

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

- 5 -

One v/ay of helping to avoid this development is for the
government to finance its expenditures by taxation and by borrowing
existing funds. It is better that borrowing be done from the current savings of the public and from past savings now held as deposits of individuals, business corporations, insurance companies,
and other fiduciary institutions, rather than from the idle reserve
funds of the banking system. Borrowing from the latter results in
a further increase in the supply of bank deposits. It amounts to
financing with new money which would be dangerous if the supply of
deposits were already actively in use and with production already
nearing capacity levels. Yet your proposal would court this danger
by bringing about an even greater increase in bank deposits. In
order to carry out the growing defense program it may at some stage
become desirable that borrowing be entirely from current savings—
which will, however, need to be larger than now—so that for every
dollar the government spends the consuming public will have spent
a dollar less. It may also be necessary to absorb a part of the
banks' additional lending power by increasing their reserve requirements, as was indicated by the Special Report which the Federal Reserve System submitted to Congress on December 31, 1940. Your proposal, on the contrary, would increase many-fold the excess reserves
of member banks, through the issuance of new money by the Federal
Reserve Banks for government expenditures, and would add enormously
to the banks' lending power.
Your plan is inconsistent with the nature of our capitalistic democracy. As our economic system works, a large part of the
public saves a part of its income which is invested in homes or in
plant, equipment, and the like, which supply current goods and
services to others. Or they lend to the government to meet its
expenses in excess of tax receipts. Interest is the most common
form of compensation that these individuals obtain for the use of
their money. These savings are often not invested directly but are
entrusted to insurance companies, banks, and other institutions,
which do the lending. These institutions receive interest and in
turn either pay interest or.provide services to savers, as well as
meet their operating costs.
Interest on debt—a large part of which is public debt—
constitutes income of private individuals, of educational and charitable trusts, of insurance companies, and of banks. A certain part
of it pays for the costs of the process of investment. Discontinuance of interest on the public debt, therefore, must be thought of
not merely as so much "saved11 the government or the taxpayer, but
also as so much income cut off from savers, trusts, institutions,
and individuals that require the safest type of investment.

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

- 6 If there were some virtue in your ideas for government
financing, other countries might be expected to follow them. But
the fact is that not even the dictator nations and none of the
other powers have abandoned the payment of interest on government
issues. For all of the boasted efficacy of German financial management, the Nazi Government has adhered to strict orthodoxy in
paying interest rat^s, considerably higher than those prevailing
in the United States, on its obligations and has sought with much
success so far to avoid creating new money. Instead, by heavy and
widely distributed taxation, the Nazi Government has sought to finance its vast expenditures so far as possible out of existing
funds and to avoid monetary inflation, possibly because the memory
of the demoralization of the mark after the first World War is still
so fresh in German memory.
Financing government by issuing currency would have a
double-barreled effect upon the interest income of the public. It
would reduce the amount of interest received by savers, and it would
increase the amount of money available for investment. As use for
thesu funds was sought, interest rates on all types of debt would
decline, until the bare costs of investment could not be met. In
such circumstances funds Intended for investment would either remain uninvested or would out of necessity bo used for the speculative purchase of existing consumption goods, physical property or
equities of various kinds. This would intensify the inflation already generated by capacity production for the defense program if
financed by new money. Such conditions would completely demoralize
our economic system as now constituted. It would mean the end of
capitalism and require the substitution of some other system In its
place.
Very truly yours,
(signed) M. S. Eccles
M. S. Eccles
Chairman

Honorable Wright Patman
House of Representatives
Washington, D. C #

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

