R-238
STATEMENT FOR THE PRESS
BY
CHAIRMAN ECCLES OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS
OF THE
FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
For immediate release

May 3, 1938

Entirely false reports are being made daily in the press and over the
radio purporting to recount what took place between Mr. Ford and myself during
the recent meeting with the President.

Because of the persistence and propa-

ganda nature of these reports, I can no longer permit them to go unchallenged.
These reports are uniformly false in indicating that Mr. Ford and I
discussed and differed with reference to governmental or other policies.

The

truth is that I had no discussion whatsoever with Mr. Ford during the entire
meeting with regard to deficit-financing, the automobile business, or other
subjects referred to in these accounts, nor did he undertake to engage in any
discussion with me in connection with these or, for that matter, any other subjects of government or business.

The conference was a most informal and friend-

ly affair, at which there was no discussion of a financial or economic nature
relative to government affairs.
My own participation was confined to giving to Mr. Edsel Ford and to Mr.
Cameron, after the meeting had concluded and while Mr. Henry Ford was inspecting
some of the White House rooms, two quotations which I commended as being worthy,
particularly at this time, of their consideration and that of other business
and financial leaders.

Contrary to published reports, I had prepared no memo-

randum whatever for this meeting.

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

-2-

Tlie two quotations to which I refer consisted of one from Macaulay's
"History of England", Vol* IV, pages 261-264., illustrating the fallacious
reasoning with regard to national debt that prevailed in England more than a
century ago in connection with the British debt; the other, an extract from
the volume, "Income and Economic Progress", pages 156-157» b y Harold G. Moulton,
published by the Brookings Institution, and dealing with the diversion of
corporate surpluses to stock market and other speculation in the late twenties.
Except for some purely incidental conversation, that was the extent of
my participation in the meeting.

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

