Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

F E D E R A L

R E S E R V E

BOARD

FOR THE PRESS

For release at 9:45 p.m. Eastern Standard Time, June 4, 1955

"The Consumer's Stake in Sound Money"
Radio Speech
of
Marriner S. Eccles
Governor of the Federal Reserve Board
Tuesday night, June 4, 1955,
from Station WJSV,
Washington, D. C.
In the consumers1 series
arranged by
The Consumers1 Committee
of the National Advisory
Council on Radio in Educatioru

THE CONSUMER'S STAKE IN SOUND MONEY

You have asked me to speak on the subject of "The Consumer's
Stake in Sound Money"•

Everybody has a stake in sound money* of course,

whether he be consumer or producer. But that is only another way of saying
that everybody has a stake primarily in the production and distribution of
goods.
Stated in the broadest possible terms, the economic wellbeing, or standard of living of a community, is dependent upon the amount
of goods and services it has available for consumption and the proportions
in which these goods and services are distributed to the various classes.
These are the real and fundamental factors. Money is merely the means by
which we are enabled to exchange the things we produce for the things other
people produce. But the manner in which the money system functions has a
profound bearing on the amount of goods that are produced and even on the
distribution of those goods among different classes. Let me indicate to
you very briefly how this is possible.
I must, in the first place, remind you that four-fifths of
our money consists of checking accounts in banks. These checking accounts,
or deposits subject to check, are money in as full a sense as notes and
coins, and their spending or hoarding have as much effect on the demand
for goods as the spending or hoarding of cash.
Let me remind you of another thing. The incomes of most
people are derived from other people1s expenditures. Our expenditures in
turn furnish income to other people. If we ail regularly disbursed our
incomes on the products of industry, and industry in turn disbursed this

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

-2money in the making of new goods, and this circular process continued at
a steady rate, the community's money income and expenditure would remain
unchanged.

An increase or decrease in the community's income is but the

counterpart of an increase or decrease in community expenditures. An increase in expenditures would come about from spending either existing
money or money newly created ttirough the extension of credit by the banking
system.

Likewise, a decrease in spending may result either from a dis-

inclination to spend existing money, or from a decrease in the amount of
money there is to spend.
All this sounds very

abstract, and yet what I have been

describing in a highly-simplified manner is a process that has a vital
bearing on the economic well-being of every citizen.

It is estimated

that in 1929 our national money income was between 80 and 90 billion dollars, and that the volume of goods and services of all kinds produced in
that year was approximately the same. In 1953 our national income had
shrunk to between 40 and 50 billion dollars, and our production of goods
and services consequently suffered a drastic decline. Our progressive
impoverishment during the depression was not the result of a voluntary
decision on the part of the people. We needed all the goods we could
produce.

Nor had our capacity to produce decreased0

We had the man power,

the materials, the equipment, and the technical knowledge to produce more
goods at any time during the depression than we produced in 1929. What
was the difficulty?

The proximate answer to this question is simple* The

effective money demand for goods decreased.

The circular stream of money

from producer to consumer, and from consumer to producer, was being steadily

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

~5~
diminished.

For various reason;:; consumerG did not disburse all the in-

come they received, and industry in turn did not disburse all the proceeds from the sale of goods. Not only did the rate of spending of money
decrease, but the amount of money there was to spend likewise decreased.
The decrease in the volume of money available for the purchase of goods
was both a contributing cause and one of the effects of this diminished
spending.

The volume of deposit currency of the country decreased by 7

billion dollars, or by one-third, as a result of credit contraction in the
banking system.

Commodity prices fell, not because of a growing abundance

of goods, but because of the inability to purchase even a greatly reduced
supply of goods.
Since 1955 we have been engaged in the slow and difficult
task of restoring the effective demand for goods. The burden has been
carried largely by the Federal Government, which has borrowed money newly
created by "
t
h
e banking system, or money from individuals, which otherwise would have remained idle, and has disbursed it in various ways to
increase incomes. Industry, by and large, has continued to disburse less
than it received, and consumers have used part of their increased incomes
to reduce debt and to increase their savings rather than to purchase
goods.

In order for recovery to proceed industry must employ its now large

but idle balances and the current savings of the community must likewise
be put to work. Otherwise these funds would remain stagnant and unproductive.
By this process of recovery incomes will be increased. The
effective money demand for goods will be increased.

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

The production of

-4*.
goods will increase to meet that demand, and hence our standard of living
will rise*

If this process proceeded in orderly fashion there should be

little occasion for a substantial rise in the average price level, since
with our present enormous unutilized productive capacity the production
of goods could be readily increased to meet the increase in demand.
Manifestly, this process could go too far.

That is, a

condition might come about in which the volume of money or means of payment continued to expand beyond the point necessary to sustain a maximum
of production and employment*
would ensue*

Now at this point a eharp rise in prices

The peak of recovery would be reached and inflation would

be underway.
That would be the danger point. It would be dangerous
because a further increase in incomes and expenditures would not then
be justified by a further increase in the production of goods, but would
result In night work and overtime work and increasing inefficiency.

Such

conditions are not only highly unstable but they also inflict grave hardships on people with fixed incomes, since they are normally accompanied by
rapidly rising prices. The war period witnessed such conditions.
How may the danger be obviated?

One of the means of com-

batting such a danger is through an intelligent control and management
of the money system in the public interest. There is no automatic
mechanism which can be relied upon to keep incomes and expenditures in
proper relation to our capacity to produce. In other words, our money
system, if left uncontrolled, will behave in a manner calculated to intensify booms and depressions. If we are to a
r
.
,
k
e any progress for the attainment of greater stability in business, we must consciously and do-

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

-5~
liberately prevent our money from increasing to feed a boom or from decreasing to intensify a depression. That is one of the principal aims
of the banking legislation now before Congress, I believe that other action by the Government is necessary for the attainment of comparative
stability, but that is another story.
I have, 1 think, indicated my concept of sound money. We
have sound money when our system behaves in such a way as to help rather
than hinder the full and efficient use of our productive resources. We
have sound money when the energy and skill of American workers, the productive capacity of our great industrial plant and equipment, and the
fruitfulness of our land and natural resources are used in such a way as
to make our real income of goods and services as large as possible, not
merely for a few prosperous years followed by a period of idleness and
want, but for year after year of enduring stability.

This, it seems

to me, should be the criterion of the soundness of money, and not the
amount of gold that is stored in the vaults of the Treasury.
The ideal would be to have the money system functioning
so smoothly and so efficiently that wo would hardly be aware of its presence. Then we could concentrate on the fundamental problems of production and the distribution of income.
The consumer's stake in sound money would thus be best
protected.

The paramount interests of everyone, consumer and producer

alike, would thus be best served.

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

I thank you.

