M. S. ECCLES STATEMENT BEFORE S M A T S EMKIMG & CURRENCY COMMITTEE
February 20, 1945
REDUCTION IN RESERVE RATIO AND RENEWAL OF AUTHORITY
TO PLEDGE UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT OBLIGATIONS
AS COLLATER&L FOR FEDERAL RESERVE NOTES

The bill under consideration (SVSIO) would accomplish the following purposes; (l) Extend indefinitely the authority of the Federal
Reserve Banks to pledge United States Government securities against Federal
Reserve notes issued by the Federal Reserve-Agents. Existing authority
expires June SO, 1945; an<i (2) Reduce the Requirements of reserves to be
held by Federal Reserve Banks from their present level of 40 per cent in
gold certificates agair^st Federal Reserve notes in circulation and 35 per
cent in gold certificates or lawful money against deposits, to a uniform
minimum of 25 per cent in gold certificates against combined -note and deposit liabilities.
The need for reducing the high reserve requirements of the Federal
Reserve Banks was mentioned by the President in his Budget message transmitted to the Congress on January 3, 1945.
Pledging of United States Government securities against Federal
Reserve notes.- In conditions prevailing today, with Federal Reserve notes
outstanding in an amount of 21.7 billion dollars and deposit liabilities
of the Federal Reserve JBanks in an amount of 16.4 billion, it is imperative
to extend the power to pledge United States Governments as collateral notes,
Without this authority the Federal Reserve Banks would be obligated to engage in a series of operations fpr the sole purpose of obtaining other
assets that would be eligible as collateral for Federal Reserve notes in
place of United States Government securities which would not be eligible.
They would have to sell a large enough voiume of Government securities to
make it necessary for banks to borrow as much as 10 billion dollars from
the Federal Reserve Banks at this time and possibly as much as 18 billions
by the end pf the year. The manner in which this would work is that the Reserve
banks would sell th^ securities in the open market; payment for them would
take out an equivalent amount of funds from the market, and member banks
would have to borrow this amount from the Federal Reserve Banks in order
to replenish their reserves. The promissory notes of member banks at the
Reserve Banks would be eligible under- the law as collateral for Federal
Reserve notes, Ho public interest would be served, but in th6 process the
market for United States Government war obligations would be disrupted at
a time when the Treasury must still raise vast sums to finance the war.
It is clear that this must not occur and that, therefore, the power to
pledge Government securities against Federal Reserve notes must be continued.
In proposing to permit.the Reserve Bankg to pledge United States
Government obligations as collateral for Federal Reserve notes, it is recommended that no time limit be placed on this authorisation. • In view of the
fact that the Federal Reserve Banks' as,sets, other than 'gold certificates,
consist at present almost entirely of Government securities, most of which
were acquired during the.war, and the .improbability that these Banks will
have any considerable volume- of other earning assets 5m"the foreseeable
future, it would not be in the public interest i
i
o have the authority to use
United States securities as backing for notes terminate at a predetermined
date.

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

- 2 -

Periodic renewal of this authority not'only involves delay, unnecessary expenditure of effort for the*Qongre$s and the Boards and the
necessity of rehearsing the same arguments over-and over again,but it also may
result in a period of uncertainty which is disturbing to the United States
Government security market. Mainten&ndB,of stable conditions in this
market is essential in view of the dominant role 'that Government securities
have oovm to'play in our financial structure, and this stability has been
and must remain indefinitely a primary objective of Federal Reserve policyf
Uncertainty about continued eligibility of Government securities as collateral for Federal Reserve notes would have an adverse effect on this
stability.
The pledging of Government securities as collateral was first
authorized thirteen years ago as an emergency measure at the depth of the
depression when the'Federal Reserve Banks needed to buy Government securi*
ties in order to.ease the pressure of debt on member banks and thus create
easier credit conditionsf The authority has been renewed from time to
time. It is apparent that it will have to be renewed for many years to
come. It would be far wiser to extend the authority for an indefinite
period, the Congress of course always retaining the right to repeal the
authority if this should appear to be desirablet
When the collateral provisions for Federal Reserve notes were
first formulated there were practically no Government securities in the
market* member banks had a large volume of so-called eligible commercial
paper, and were expected to borrow on th&t paper when they required additional reserves or currency* The situation hag radically changed since
then. There is now an enormous public debt which constitutes a large part
of the earning asstets of member banks; the total* volume "
o
f eligible paper
has declined, and many banks have practically, no such paper. Banks are
also reluctant to borrow from the Reserve Banks and, if they should borrow
in considerable volume* this would result in ra'tightening of credit condi<tions with disturbing effects on the price of Government securities,
Furthermore, if they borrowed, they would borrow on their promissory notes
secured by Government obligations. . Consequently, what would be back of the
notes would still be United'States Government securities - but with an
endorsement by a member bankf Surely an obligation of the United States
Government is not improved in crcdit standing by-endorsement of some member
bank1.
Collateral requirements are not an effective limitation on credit
expansion^by the Federal Reserve Bankf** ©p^n^market operations of these
Banks
gove'rned by considerations of
p.ublic interest and not of
Federal "Reserve Bank earnings* I
f
l
i
f
o
e
n the Seserve Banks purchase United
States Government securities tbey pay f:ov them by deposit credit. "Once
these deposit 'liabilities have &deti incurred the Federal Reserve B&nks ar.e
obliged to permit their withdrawal in currency. The public demand fo'r
currency, in turn, depends on business conditions, activity of tradef the
volume of wage payments, the price level,, and the extent of the people1 s

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

wish to hold their liquid assets in the form of cash rather than bank
deposits, or Government' securities. Member b^rtks, to ayoid insolvency^
must permit their customers to withdraw, their deposits.in qur^encyj Federal
Reserve Banks in turn must permit the ,Member bank's to.obtain the currency
by drawing on their balances with the ReserverBanks. Consequently,, the
Reserve Banks have' no choice ^.n'the matter because they have no control
over the demand for currency*'" ,It serves^,no useful.,purgo$^ to encumber
these unavoidable operations'by legal restHptiQns .which inevitably must
give way as soon as they woiild actually restrict.
In any case Federal Reserve, notes have a prior li§n on all apsets
of the Federal Reserve Banks and ar6 obligations of thq United Staters
Government, Segregation of special assets of the.Federal Reserve Banks
as collateral for these notes addsriothing'totheir quality* It is merely
an obsolete piece of machinery conceived at a, time when conditions were
Radically different from those that^prevail today * By authorising the
pledging of Government securities as collateral, for Federal Reserve note©
the collateral requirement is extended to practically all the assets of
the Reserve Banks arid ceases to b
f
c an interference with the performance
of their duties and the discharge of theif responsibilities*- This extent
sion should, therefore,'be a permanent part .
o
f the law.
Reduction of reserve ratio$ ~ Conditions arising out o£..thf war
have caused the reserve ratio of Federal: Reserve' Brinks tco decline from 91
per.ceAt at the end of 19414 soori after our entry into the war, to 49 per
cent at the end"of 1944. If developments continue at the rate.of recent
months th0 ratio will fall 'almost to the legal minimum by th$ e^d ^f the
present calendar year. If gold export or ourrency withdrawal^ of both
should be greater than in 1944# the legal minimum will be reached sooner.
The'following table shows the faqtors in the situation, together with hypothetical projections through 1945 hased on probable .trends of .currency
deposit, and gold movements.

Federal Reserve Bank

Dec t 31,
Dec. 31,
1941'
'
1944

.Projections
Dec, '31,
June 30,
19.46
1945 .

(tn billions of dollars)
18 «7
18 .2

Re&erves

80 ;8

Deposits
F. R. notes outstanding
Liabilities requiring reserves

14*7
8.2
22.9

16.4
21.7
36T7T

Reserve ratio

90.8

(Per cent)
49.0
44.3

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

17,4
23.7
THT

17.7
13 ,4
26.7
5S7T

39.2

- 4 -

It will be seen that the. decline in the reserve ratio has been
•duetto a reduction ip Federal Reserve' ?ank reserves ancj to increases in
Federal "Reserve riote.and deposit liabilities. Reduction ,of reserves has
deflectedt the fact tha"jb4most of'this cputxtry1 sl exports have been on lendlease, while our, imports, have .been* on a cash basis. Countries that have
.United States have not been able to buy goods here,
s*>ld commodities to
on account of war restrictions, and have 6'ither withdrawn or earmarked
gbld against the time when goods will onoe more be available for sale.
Growth of Federal Reserve note circulation has been a part of the
general expansion of currency which h&s accompanied'war activity in every
country in the world. Expansion of both notes and deposits has reflected
growth of Government war expenditures, enlargement of national money incomef and advancement of payrolls and trade at higher prices. So long as
the Federal Reserve. Banks continue-to'dp their part, tas. they surely must,
to assist the Treasury in-Government financing and in maintaining stable
conditions in the% market for United States Governrii^nt.securities, th?se
Banks must not be restricted by an arbitrary reserve ratio.
Whi.le the reserve ratio for all the Federal Reserve Banks combined is at present .still .nearly 49 per cent,' that is, donsiderably above
the legal minimum, individual Reserve Banks have ratios that are much
nearer to the low point required b y lawy_;&,'table .i«'s>-attached showing the
reserve'position of individual Reserve Banks at selected typical dates.
While adjustment in .individual Bank ratios is made1 periodipally by changing
their»participation'in the System holdings of United States Government
securities, this involves a great deal of unnecessary work in practical
operation* Since it is apparent that &eans-must .be fouri£ to handle the
ratio problem, it is highly desirable*that action be take$ promptly. This
would not only allay fears and uncertainties among'holders and.prospective
purchasers of''United States Government securities, but would also eliminate
the1 necessity of making frequent and complicated adjustments among the
Reserve Banks.
.Ihe-re-are-several ways to j
u
e
j
s
t the situation, all, of which have
been 6.&re'fully-considered, One way would be* to issue Federal Reserve Bank
notesj, which, require no reserves, in place, of Federal-Reserve notes;"
another way woul& be suspension "of reserve requirements by the Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System, which is authorized by law, and
a third way would be a reduction.reserve requirements by the Congress.
Other devicesf such as issuance of currency by the Treasury, or reduction
of member bsgak reserve requirements, have been reviewed and found 19 be
inadequate *or inappropriate. Reduction of the ratio by law, which is
proposed itf-the bill, i
~
s the most clear-cut "method, as well as the most
consistent tyith the responsibility of the Congress to regulate the country's
monetary policy.
Ifcsue of Federal Reserve Bank notes in. their present f
'
O
'
r
i
f
t was
authorized by the-EmergeiXOy Banking J^at of March 1933, and the authority
will expire when the President declares that the emergency is over. The

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

- 5 -

RESERVE RATIO OF EACH FEDERAL RESERVE BAtfK
on the 15th of the month from July 1944 to February 1945
(Per cent)

Federal
Reserve Bank

Ju^Ly
1944

•October .January February
1945
1945;
1844

Boston
New York
Philadelphia
Cleveland

53 .8
50 ,6
48 .8
52 .9

43,6
46,4
48,6
43,3

45.4
52.8
43.8
45.3

45.8
60.7
44,4
43.6

Richmond
Atlanta
Chicago
St. Lo-uis

57 .5
57 .0
64 .7
54 .2

47*6
51,7
63,6
58 ,0

45.652,0
49.7
43,3

46.6
52.1
'51.7
46,5

Minneapolis
Kansas City
Dallas
San Francisco

49 .6
53 ,2
51 ,1
66 .6

51,5
45.7
46.6
63.8

44 .S
45.0
45.5
54.2

44,8
46,9
44.1
51,3

56 .0

52.0

49.3

48. ,8

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

Total

- 6 -

need for the lower ratio may continue beyond that date. Furthermore, the
difference between Federal Reserve notes and Federal Reserve Bank notes
gives rise to misunderstanding, and it would be simpler and less confusing
to the public if Federal Reserve currency were all of one kind. It would
be best at a time like this to have a Federal Reserve ratio that indicated
to the Congress and to the people the amount of gold certificates held by
the Reserve Banks against their total deposit and note liabilities of all
kinds.
The authority in section 11(c) of the Federal Reserve Act to suspend reserve requirements doe's hot* appear to be the best method of meeting
the situation, because the power was not designed for a situation like the
present which is of indefinite duration. Suspension must be for a period
not to exceed thirty days, renewable at intervals of fifteen days. It also
requires a penalty in the form of a progressive interest rate, to be determined by the Board, and added to the'discount rate of the Federal Reserve
Banks. J
^
t a time like the present, when discount rate charges must fit
into the general rate policy adopted for war financing, this would not
bo tho best procedure.
Consequently the bill provides for a direct reduction of the
required ratio. Such-an actic^ft would bo entirely consistent with the changes
in conditions which have occurred since the ratio was first established by
the Congress. The original purposes of the ratio were (1-) to assure adequate resources for the' Reserve, Banks to meet demands for gold or lawful
money by depositors arnd note Holders, C2) to limit the expan&ion of Federal
Reserve Bank credit, -and (3) to assure *the public that there w;as'at least
40 per cent An gold back of the Federal* Reserve notes which were then being
introduced for the first time.
The first purpose is no longer compelling since gold*redemption
is now not permitted for domestic usef and gold can be exported only under
license. 1/Vhile the country's Aggregate gold reserves are ample to meet any
conceivable foreign demand? a reserve ratio high enough to meet possible
demands for both domestic and foreign use is no longer appropriate under
present conditians^.. The seoond purpose -- limitation of Federal Reserve
Bank expansion — is not relevant at a time when expansion by the Reserve
Banks is essential to the needs of war finance, Thirdly, confidence in
Federal Reserve notes is well established, and whether the amount of gold
back of the notes is 40 per cent or 25 per cent makes no practical
difference.
War conditions have caused all belligerents to reduce or abolish
central bank reserve requirements. Mechanical limitations on the ability
of a central banking organization to extend credit must inevitably give
way in time of war to the paramount obligation to support the war effortf

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

- 7 -

A reduction to 25 per cent is proposed because it would be sufficient for all foreseeable contingencies• It would enable the Reserve
Banks to meet such additional demands for currency by the public and for
reserve balances by member banks as are likely to occur. The currency
supply and the bank deposit structure could nearly double before thu legal
minimum would be reached.
The bill provides for elimination of the distinction made in the
present law between reserves required against notes and against deposits
both as to percentage and as to composition of the reservesf Since the two
liabilities are interconvertible at the option of the owners, the same requirements should apply to both* The provision in the bill that legal reserves should consist only of gold certificates would also eliminate controversy as to what constitutes lawful money, and whether the Federal Reserve
Banks could, if so minded, use their own notes (Federal Reserve notes or
Federal Reserve Bank notes) as reserves against their own deposits*
A clean-cut uniform requirement of gold certificate reserves of
25 per cent against both notes and deposits appears to be the best solution
of the problem,
In conformity with the proposed reduction of the ratio to 25 per
cent the bill decreases proportionately the levels of the ratio at which
the imposition of the different penalty rates provided in the law when
reserves are suspended would be proscribed,

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

February 19, 1945

