Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

ADDRESS BEFORE THE
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF SUPERVISORS
OF STATE BANKS
IN iASHINGTON, D.C., SEPTEMBER 25, 1?U7

BY
MARRINER S. ECCLES
CHAIRMAN OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS
OF THE
FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM

"POSTWAR BANK CREDIT PROBLEMS"

FOR RELEASE WHEN DELIVERED
AT 11:20 A.M.

POSTWAR BANK CREDIT PROBLEMS
Address by Marriner S f Eccles, Chairman, Board of Governors
of the Federal Reserve System to
the National Association of Supervisors of State Banks
Washington, D« C t , September 25, 19U7

President Leggett, members, and guests of the National Association
of Supervisors of State Banks:
Because of our common problems and responsibilities, I appreciate
this opportunity to participate in your proceedings.

In the chaotic world

of today, groping for answers to the overriding problems of economic security
and enduring peace, we can find comfort in the strong and healthy position of
our banking system*

At the same time we must be fully aware of the dangers

which the present vigorous inflationary forces may threaten for the banking
system*
Inflation, the consequence of war finance
'•

mi'

''I

I III mi < in

>••

«.!•«! . 1 . . I»H P , il

i> I'm m i '

I

Ill

.

T

.

in •—

!•

•)• i ,

•i.nnh,

«»

Postwar inflation, with its severe distortions in the structure
of prices, wages, and profits, is primarily due to the enormous wartime
increase in our money supply•

The banks of the country, including the

Federal Reserve 3anks, in helping to meet the needs of war finance, brought
about this increase.

In the six years from the middle of 19U0 to the middle

of 19U6 the Federal Gpvernment spent nearly UOO billion dollars, most of
which was for national defense and war purposes, Much less than half of this
amount was met by tax receipts and the balance of about 225 billion dollars
was borrowed•

During this six-year period commercial and Federal Reserve

Banks together increased their holdings of Government securities by 90
billion dollars, and savings institutions, businesses, and individual investors
purchased the remainder of the securities sold.
Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

- 2

Commercial bank holdings of Government securities have been reduced somewhat since the postwar peak by the Treasury's debt retirement
program, but they are still more than four times as large as in l<?hO. In
expanding their portfolios of Governments, banks did not decrease their holdings of other assets. As a matter of fact, the total of their loans, other
securities, reserves, and other cash have increased since 19^0 by about 21
billion dollars. As a result of this credit expansion, largely to the Government, commercial bank deposits increased by 70 billion dollars.

In addition,

currency in circulation showed a growth of 20 billion dollars.
This expansion in bank credit and consequently in the money supply
was made possible by the large excess reserves which were held by the banks
at the beginning of the war, and by the additional reserves"that were provided by the Federal Reserve through an increase of over 20 billion dollars
in their holdings of Government securities*
It is inevitable that in financing a Urar business and individual
holdings of money and Government securities increase. The reason for this
is that people are paid for furnishing the goods and services which are
needed to carry on the war and are not available for purchase by business
and consumers.

Consequently, incomes expand more rapidly than consumption

can be increased.

Unless taxes are raised sufficiently to absorb all of

the surplus income, savings must increase, and they must be held largely in
the form of bank deposits, currency^ or Government securities. To the extent
that the Government expenditures are not met by taxes or the sale of securities to nonbank investors,- the balance hiust be absorbed by the banking
system, which results in expansion of the money supply.

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

- 3-

If*the public had attempted to spend their entire excess income,
prices would have risen very rapidly.

However, due to the willingness of

the public to save durine the 'war period and due to the effective harness of
wartime controls that were put" into effect, prices rose but little during the
war.. By the end of the war Vast"holdings of money and other liquid assets
had been accumulated and large deferred demands had been built up.

At the

prevailing level of prices, demand was far i
r
i excess of any supplies that
could be made available within any short period of time.
It should have been apparent that if these forces wer*e permitted
free play, a sharp rise in prices would result. The people of the nation,
however, not fully realizing the dangers in the situation, made clear their
wishes that controls be removed.

Business wanted freedom from allocations,

price controls, building permits, rationing and repeal of excess profits.
Farmers wanted release of all controls affecting agricultural products.
Labor wanted removal of restraints on higher wages•

Bankers generally

sympathized with the-desires of all these groups to remove controls.

In

response to these Toublic pressures, wartime controls, such as allocation of
raw materials, building permits, price and wage restrictions, as veil as the
repeal of the excess profits tax, were prematurely abandoned.
T
f
l
f
e are currently witnessing the results of this national policy,
"fith demand' for goods already large because of hi~h levels of income and
with a huge -backlog of domestic and international demand reinforced by huge
accumulations of liquid assets after five years of war, price inflation was
inevitable. The country is now suffering the consequences of having placed
our reliance upon the restoration of a competitive price situation to bring
about necessary postwar readjustments in an abnormal period when effective
demand far exceeds available supplies.
Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

- uAs a result, the economy is caught fast in a serious wage-costprice spiral*
spiral.

Short fafm crops at home and abroad have intensified this

International crisis, in part the result of our rising prices, is

imposing on us obligations that can only be discharged by actions that will
increase our inflation difficulties. Yet we should not allow what is left
of European democracy to perish through starvation and communism.

Nor can

we ultimately solve our problem of inflation without the restoration of
to hel^ take care of the world's leeds.
Europe's vast productivity/ The danger that faces us is that inflation
will go on unchecked'and end, as inflations always have ended, in economic
collapse.
The higher the spiral of inflation is wound by further general
price and wage increases, by further r&pid expansion of private debt, and
by failure to reduce public expenditures for all purposes that can be
eliminated or postponed until the emergency has ended, the more serious the
inevitable readjustment is certain to be#

The longer the ultimate reaction

is postponed, the longer it will take to reach a stable condition of employment and production.

Readjustment in our domestic situation is overdue,

and the sooner it can be brought about, the better it will be for the nation
and the world.
Cost of maintaining the peace
We spent nearly 350 billion dollars to win the war, and Te shall
need to spend substantial, although greatly smaller amounts, to keep the
peace. Large parts of the world have been devastated £nd, even in those
parts left intact, the customary processes and channels of trade and commerce
have been destroyed or upset.

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

People in nearly all nations have vast

-5 holdings of money and large deferred demands for £he necessities of life,
and supplies of nearly everything to meet these demands arp inadequate. The
money they have, however, cannot be used to make purchases from pountries
which have goods for sale, and they have little else to offer in exchange.
When people are thus upset, they are susceptible tothe lure of political
panaceas and are likely to generate feelings of hatred toward others more
fortunate than they. This state of mind is a threat to stability and peace
in the world*
In the two fiscal years from July 19U6 to June I9U8 we have
budgeted expenditures of more than 25 billion dollars for the maintenance
of our national defense. \
'
e have provided altogether since the end of the
war foreign grants and credits of* approximately 16.5 billion dollars, which
only
is/two-thirds of our military budget for the first two postwar fiscal years.
Surely this is a small amount to make available for helping to win the peace,
when compared with our vast expenditure of 350 billions used to win the war.
It cannot be denied or ignored that continued large loans and
grants to foreign countries are either a heavy current burden upon our taxpayers or a strong inflationary force on our economy, but so are our even
larger military expenditures, which are considered by many as necessary for
maintaining peace.
We should be fully aware of the costs and risks of providing foreign
aid and make adjustments in our policies accordingly. We cannot be lavish
in aid to other countries without suffering the consequences of inflation,
heavier taxation, or the reimposition of controls. Countries receiving
assistance should recognize the burden that is being imposed on our economy,
and it is imperative that they take measures to assure the most effective

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

- 6-

use of their own resources as well as of those received from us.* If thesfe
requirements are met, it would be shortsighted, as well as highly selfish,
prevent starvation and to
for us to deny aid needed toj reconstruct
productive capacity in other
countries in order to increase our already large consumption for the purpose
of counteractinp- inflation. The best remedy for inflation is more production,
'and the greatest unused productive resources now lie outside of this country,
but they cannot be effectively operated by starving people devoid of equipment and supplies.
Responsibility of Federal Reserve System
What bearing, you may wonder, does all this have upon our Common
problems and responsibilities of bank supervision?

The Federal Reserve has

a close interest in these matters, because we are responsible for providing
the reserves that support our entire money and credit system. V
f
e must constantly consider whether the existing supply of bank credit is redundant or
inadequate. This judgment must be based upon the needs and behavior of the
economy.

There is not time here to discuss the specific objectives, standards,

and various other considerations that provide the basis for these policy
decisions. The Board of Governors, the Federal Open Karket Committee, composed of the Board and representatives of the Federal Reserve Banks, the
operating officials of the Reserve Sanks, and the Federal Advisory Council
in giving advice, must constantly keep in mind the impact of Federal Reserve
policies o
r
i the economy.
International affairs are of importance to us because of their
general impact on our domestic economy and more directly because the net
resultant of all international financial transactions are reflected in gold

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

- 7-

movements*

Gold, together with Federal Reserve Bank credit, supplies the

basic reserves of our banking system*

The interest and responsibilities of

the Reserve System in this field are recognized by the Congress in including
the Chairman of the Board of Governors as one.pf five members of the National
Advisory Council,

This Council has responsibility for supervising and co-

ordinating the international financial policies of the Federal Government*

Changed position of banks
Because of their interests and responsibilities, the Federal Reserve
authorities are greatly impressed with the changed position of banks that has
resulted from war.

These changes will affect the duties and responsibilities

of all bank supervisory agencies , The vast volume of deposits and currency
not only offers a threat of inflation for the economy as a whole, but it
may create serious problems for individual banks.

v

ith our system, of lit,000

separate banks, shifts of deposits from bank to bank necessitate corresponding shifts of assets or other adjustments. For this reason our ,banking
v»

system requires a high degree of liquidity and these requirements have been
enlarged by the great wartime growth -and broad distribution of bank deposits•
Another problem qonfronting bank supervisory agencies is the great
existing potential for further expansion of credit.

Generally in the past

banks could not expand their loans and investments, except when new funds
came to them or unless they irer.e wrillinj to borrow.

r

<hen one bank lost funds,

it had to borrow or liquidate assets. "*hile for individual banks that
.situation still exists, the very large holdings of ,Government securities now
held by banks makes it easy for them to shift to other assets that seem more
attractive•

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

- 8 -

T
f
l
l
h
e
n banks sell their Government securities, in the absence of any
other buyer, the Federal Reserve is obliged to purchase them. Otherwise,
the Government securities market would decline and might collapse*

This would

not only greatly increase the cost of carrying the public debt, but would
seriously endanger our entire financial structure, in which Governments now
occupy such an important place.
^ e n the Federal Reserve System acquires additional Government
securities, new reserves are created; these reserves pass to other banks and
ultimately may provide the basis for an expansion in credit amounting to six
to ten tiires the reserves made available. This ability of the banking system
to bring about the creation of new reserves without borrowing is a new element
in the credit situation.

ith an active demand for loans, it can be a power-

ful inflationary force. The Board has long recognized this problem, discussed
it fully in its Annual Reports to Congress for 1916 and 19U6, and presented
proposals for its solution.

Most of you may be familiar with the substance

of these reports; time does not permit a full discussion of them here. Up
to date little support has been received for the Board's suggestions, and
nothing whatever has been done to put the Board in a position where it could
restrain inflationary expansion by the banking system.
toother potential for credit expansion is the large flow of gold
that is now coming into this country. This inflow has already amounted to
nearly 2 billion dollars this year.

Since the middle of the year total

loans and investments of commercial banks have been expanding at a rate
equivalent to 10 billion dollars a year.

If this should continue it would

provide an inflationary force more than double the anti-inflationary effect

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

- 9-

of the prospective surplua in the Federal budget for this fiscal year*

It

would equal the inflationary impact of the unprecedented surplus of exports
over imports in this country's foreign trade during recent months. Under
present circumstances, it does not appear possible for the Federal Reserve
System to check this credit expansion by selling Government securities and
thus absorbing bank reserves.
In summary, it may be said that banks have been the beneficiaries
of wartime developments*

Their assets have increased tremendously and these

assets are perhaps more liquid and less subject to depreciation than at any
previous time of active business. Bank earnings have grown more rapidly
than expenses, so that profits are relatively large, and capital structures
have been enlarged*

Finally, their large holdings of Government securities

make it possible for banks to shift readily to any other more attractive
assets that may be available.
Banks can also ,suffer the consequences of unpleasant economic
developments, as they have at times in the past.

Some of the most disastrous

of these developments have occurred during my career as a banker and businessman and during the careers of most of you*

Banks are most seriously affected

when they have helped to bring about the conditions by undue expansion of
credit followed by rapid liquidation.
Although

present inflationary developments are largely the result

of war finance, in the past two years expansion of private credit has become
a factor of increasing importance*

Conditions are favorable for a further

substantial expansion of private credit that may contribute further to excessive
inflation and lead to disastrous consequences for the economy.

Such a develop-

ment would threaten to endanger the healthy position of our banking system.

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

- 10

^Jhat can supervisors do?
As I have indicated, the existing general monetary and credit
powers of the Federal Reserve $re inadecpate for preventing Such a
development.

Nor can bank supervision,> in view of its limited scope and of

the inflationary forces? already generated, be expected to prevent further
inflation*

We can, however, understand- the nature of the problem and use our

influence to discourage banks from contributing to it*

This would help to

diminish resulting undesirable effects upon banks. <lhat specifically can be
done?
(1) Maintenance of a hi?h degree of liquidity should be
encouraged; banks should be discouraged from reducing their large
holdings of Government securities and cash assets in order to
acquire less liquid and more risky assets*
(2) Supervisors should take a critical attitude toward any
expansion of loans, unless they contribute directly to increased
production and movement of goods. This attitude should apply particularly to consumer credit, real estate loans based on inflated
values, loans to carry excessive inventories, and any loans for
speculative purposes.
(3) As long as banks maintain their present large holdings
of cash and Government securities, most of them are adequately
capitalized.

Banks with low ratios of capital to risk assets,

however, should build up their capital.

If banks persist in

increasing their risk assets, they should be required to enlarge
their capital accordingly by retention of earnings.

If retained

earnings are not sufficient, then additional stock should be sold.

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

-li-

lt is important for us to keep in mind that future losses of banks
are determined by current policies* While each individual loan of a bank may
appear sound taken by itself, the practices of banks in the aggregate may
contribute to generally unhealthy conditions.
in general cannot remain sound•

In an unsound economy, banks

Our banks now appear to be in a position to

withstand the severe economic storm that is threatening.

This is not the

time for them to remove their storm shutters or venture out into the gale#

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

