B
O
A
R
D OP G
O
V
E
R
N
O
R
S
OF THE
FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM

May 26,

1947.

For immediate release
STATEMENT OF CHAIRMAN ECCLES
BEFORE
SENATE BANKING AND C
U
R
R
E
N
C
Y COMMITTEE O
N S. 829
Mr. Chairman and Members of the Committee:
The purpose of this b i l l (S. 829) is to regulate bank holding
companies so that their operations w i l l be in accordance with established
banking principles and public policy*
This b i l l reflects the Federal Reserve System's experience over a
period of approximately fourteen years in dealing with bank holding company
problems• Since its introduction i t has been studied and appraised by various
interested banking groups. With suggested technical amendments and others, a l l
of which are acceptable to the Reserve Board and none of which would affect its
basic purposes, the b i l l conforms to recommendations made in reports by the Federal Advisory Council of the Federal Reserve System and by the Association of Reserve City Bankers. In addition, i t has the support of tht Independent Bankers
Association of the Twelfth Federal Reserve District and of the great majority.of
the major bank holding companies.
The bank holding company problem is not a new one to the Congress,
in 1933» after extensive hearings which began in 1930* Congress recognized the
need for and undertook to provide effective regulation of bank holding companies.
As a part of the Banking Act of 1933$ Section 5 1 ^ of the Revised Statutes was
amended by adding several new paragraphs applying exclusively to bank holding
companies (called "holding company affiliates 11 in the amendment) and placing
limitations and restrictions upon the right of such companies to vote the stock
of member banks which they owned. Prior to 1933, this section merely defined
the rights of stockholders #f national banks to vote their stock i n such banks.
As amended, and as i t now stands, this section provides that a holding company, before i t may vote its stock of a member bank, must f i r s t obtain
a permit to do sg from the Federal Reserve Board. The Board, in turn, is
authorized in its discretion to grant or deny such a permit. As a condition
to the granting of the permit the holding company is required, on behalf of i t self and its controlled banks, to agree to submit to examinations, to establish
certain reserves, to agree to dispose of a l l interest i n securities companies,
and its officers, directors and agents are subject to the same penalties for
falsification of records as those applicable in the case of national banks.
Congress presumably f e l t that these amendments would be adequate to
insure effective regulation. The Board*s experience in administering those provisions, however, has demonstrated clearly the need for additional legislation
i f regulation is to be effective in correcting and preventing practices which
are contrary to public policy and interest.

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

~ 2 PRESENT L
A
W IS ENTIRELY VOLUNTARY
No on© would suggest that in amending Seotion 5l}\)\ i n 1933 $ Congress
intended to bring some bank holding companies under regulation and to leave
others, even though meeting the some definitions, free from regulation Yet
that is what the law now permits beoause i t is based solely upon the voting per*
mit. A holding company becomes subject to the law only i f a voting permit is
issued* But there is ho mandatory requirement i n the law that a holding company
obtain such a permit. Undoubtedly i t was believed that a l l would do so. A l l
have not done so, however, because as a practical matter holding companies can
i n many instances control the operations of banks without the need for voting
their shares in such banks. In one instance disclosed by the Boardfs files a
holding company owns a controlling stock interest i n 2U member banks, yet has
obtained voting permits covering only 2 of those banks.
TWienever the Board receives an application for a voting permit, i t
makes a thorough examination of the holding company and its affiliates to determine what corrections, i f any, are necessary to meet basic standards. I f such
corrections appear necessary, they are made a condition to the granting of the
voting permit. In one important case, however, when advised of the need for such
corrections, the applying company simply abandoned its application for a voting
permit. I t was able to control its banks without voting the shares i^iich i t owns
i n these banks, and thus was able to escape such regulation as existing law provided.
Clearly the law should apply to a l l bank holding companies alike. This
cannot be accomplished by a law which permits a holding company to elect not to
ubject itself to regulation. The law must be mandatory to be effective. The
proposed b i l l provides that a l l bank holding companies meeting the prescribed
definition shall register with the Board and, having registered, shall be automatically subject to a l l of the regulatory provisions of the statute.
PRESENT DEFINITION OF HOLDING C
O
M
P
A
N
Y INADEQUATE
Not only does the present law f a i l to reach those companies which eleot
not to apply for a voting permit, but i t also fails to reach others because of
inadequacies in the definition of a "holding company a f f i l i a t e . n The present
definition embraces only those holding companies which control member banks. This
excludes from any regulation those companies which operate i n a l l respects as bank
holding companies, but which control only nonmember banks, even though, as is f r e quently the case, the latter include insured banks. There arc a number of companies i n this category which operate numerous banking offices having substantial
amounts of deposits.
Another and more important defect is in that portion of the present
definition which defines a bank holding company as any company "which owns or
controls, directly or indirectly, either a majority of the shares of capital
stock of a member bank or more than 50 per centum of the number of shares voted
for the election of directors of any one bank at the preceding election, * * *. w

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

- 3 The purpose underlying this definition is to reach those companies
which control the management and policies of banks, and with this basic premise
the Board is in entire agreement* However, i t has long been recognized by
Congress and by the courts that effective control of one company by another
does not depend upon the ownership or control of a majority of the voting
shares* Control can be, and often i s , exercised through the ownership of a
much smaller proportion of the total shares outstanding* Sometimes i t is maintained without the ownership of any shares*
Similarly, the number of shares owned or controlled, as compared with
the number of shares voted for the election of directors at the preceding
election is an unsatisfactory basis for determining whether a holding company
relationship exists* Such a restricted test puts i t within the power of the
holding company to establish an absence of control when, i n fact, i t is at the
same time exercising most effective control* The case i n which regulation is
most necessary is usually the case i n which the attempt is made to take advantage of the existing definition to escape regulation*
The definition of a bank holding company i n S* 829 conforms more
nearly to the practical realities of intercorporate relationships* I t is derived in large part from the definition of a holding company adopted by Congress
when i t enacted the Public U t i l i t y Holding Company Aot of 1935* The f i r s t part
of the definition extends automatic coverage to a l l companies which own 15 per
cent or more of the voting shares of two or more banks*. However, even though a
company may own more than 15 per cent but less than a majority of such shares,
i f i t can demonstrate that .it does jaot exercise a controlling influence over
the management and policies of its banks, i t would not be subjected to regulation under the. Act* The second part of the definition permits the Board to
declare a company to be a bank holding company even though i t owns less than 15
per cent, or possibly none, of the shares of two or more banks, provided the
Board finds, after hearing, that the company does i n fact control such banks*
The Board believes that this definition is practical and just. A l l
companies owning the specified number of shares are affected alike* Bach has
a ready procedure at hand for escaping regulation by demonstrating that i t does
not centrol the management and policies of two or more banks* In the clear
oases (such, for example, as insurance companies which own bank shares purely
for investment purposes) absence of control may be easily demonstrated without
hardship* In the close cases, the burden of proof would be upon the company to
show that i t is not i n fact exerting the kind of influences upon banks which require that i t be subjected to regulation*
R
E
G
U
I
A
T
O
H
S
T ASPECTS
Turning now to the regulatory aspects of the problem, under the present
law the only provision which implies a degree of administrative supervision relates to such examinations was shall be necessary to disclose f u l l y the relations
between" the holding company and its controlled banks,, and the further provision
that for violation of the statute or of its agreement with the Board, the holding company's voting permit may be revoked* In that event, certain penalties
affecting the banks in the holding company system may be applied*

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

-

k

-

These provisions, particularly when considered in the light of the
voluntary aspects of the existing law, f a l l far short of providing effective
regulation* In the f i r s t place, the Board's right to examine a holding
company and its controlled banks is not coupled with the specific power to
require corrections. Furthermore, the penalties for violations of the statute
or of a holding company^ agreement with the Board are directed primarily at
the banks in the holding company group and not at the holding company i t s e l f .
The existing law contains no declaration of Congressional policy upon
matters which vitally affect the entire problem. The Board feels that >ank
holding company legislation should include as many specific declarations of
Congressional purpose as possible, and that, where the exercise of administrative discretion must of necessity be called into play, the legislative standards
for the exercise of such discretion should be clearly stated. The provisions of
S. 829 are designed to give effect to these principles.
NONBANKING ACTIVITIES OF B
A
N
K HOLDING COMPANIES
One of the most salutary requirements of S. 829 is that contained in
Section 5, which would require that the activities of bank holding companies be
limited solely to the business of banking or of managing and controlling subsidiary banks. To that end a holding company would be required within a stated
period to divest i t s e l f of any securities except those i n companies which are
necessary and incidental to its banking operations, or vfaich are eligible for
investment by national banks.
The reasons underlying this requirement are simple. Accepted rules
of law confine the business of banks to banking and prohibit them f#r engaging
in extraneous businesses such as owning and operating industrial and manufacturing
concerns. I t is axiomatic that the lender and borrower or potential borrower
should not be dominated %r controlled by the same management. In one exceptional
situation, however, the corporate device has been used to gather under one
management many different and varied enterprises wholly unrelated to the con~
duct of a banking business.
When a bank holding company has expanded i t s operatibns into other an*
unrelated fields, i t tends more and more to take on the characteristics #f the
type f f institution to which the Investment Company Act of 1
9
1
+
0 was addressed.
Yet such a company, i f i t holds a voting permit from the Board, is exempted from
the provisions of the Investment Company Act, I t is necessary, i n keeping with
sound banking principles, that such a company should be required by law to adjust
its affairs so as to become either a bank holding company or an investment
company* I t should not be permitted to remain a hybrid beyond a period reasonably necessary for i t to adjust its affairs.
Section 5 would make i t unlawful after two years, or longer i f the
Board deemed necessary to avoid undue hardship, for a bank holding company to
own the securities of any company other than a Vank or to engage i n any business
other than that of banking or managing and controlling banks. Exceptions are
made in favor of those companies which are reasonably incidental to the business
of banking, such as safety deposit companies and the like, an<i a bank holding

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

- 5 company may lawfully acquire securities from its banks when requested to do so
by any Federal or State examining authorities. In addition, under an amendment
which has been suggested to and approved by the Board, the holding company would
also be permitted to acquire such securities as are eligible for investment by
member banks.
B
A
N
K HOLDING COIIPANY EXPANSION
The problem of how far bank holding company systems should be permitted to expand has long beon of serious concern. There is perhaps a greater
need for a positive declaration of Congressional policy on this question than on
any other phase of the holding company problem* I t is in this area that one of
the greatest potential evils of bank holding company operations exists. That
e v i l , which permits a holding company without legal hindrance to dominate major
portions of the banking facilities of particular sections, is one utfiich strikes
at the heart of our traditional systom of competitive banking.
Under existing law a chartered bank may be prevented by the regulatory
agency to which i t is subject from expanding i t s banking offices either by the
establishment of new branches or by taking over and operating the offices of
other banks. In order to establish branches, national banks must f i r s t obtain
pennission from the Comptroller of the Currency, State member banks from the
Board, and nonmember insured banks from the FDIC. But the bank holding company
is not subject to any such requirements. I f a bank i n its group is denied the
right to establish an additional office, there is nothing to prevent i t from acquiring the stock of an existing bank and simply adding the institution to its
l i s t of controlled banks, operating i t , for a l l practical purposes, as a branch
of the enti re system.
This loophole, enabling a bank holding company to expand at its
pleasure, lends i t s e l f readily to the amassing of vast resources obtained largely
from the public, which can be controlled and used by the relatively few who comprise the management of the holding company, giving them an unfair and overwhelming advantage i n acqui ring additional properties and i n carrying out an
unlimited program of expansion. Such power can be used to acquire independent
banks by measures which leave the local management and minority stockholders
l i t t l e with which to defend themselves except their own strenuous protests.
"While the managements of the great majority of the important bank holding company systems have sought the Boardfs views, i f not its approval, on proposed bank acquisitions, there is one case where a holding company management
has openly defied the Board i n its attempt to halt an unbridled bank expansion
program. I refer to Transamorica Corporation, with its vast group of controlled
banks in Arisona, California, Nevada, Oregon and Washington* The Transomerica
management has publicly sought to justify i t s e l f on the ground that Congress, by
withholding from the Board the direct power to curb such expansion, has thereby
indicated its approval of Transamorica policies.
I t may be interesting to the members of the Committee to have the
latest figures on the size of the Transamorica banking empire. As of December
Jl, 19U6, information available to the Board indicates that there are i|i banks
i n the Transamerica group, operating a total of 619 banking offices having aggregate deposits i n excess of six and one-half b i l l i o n dollars. This represents
more than Up per cent of a l l the banking offices and 38 per cent of a l l of the
Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

- 6 commercial deposits i n the five-State area. Since 195k the Transamerica group
has acquired a total ef 126 banks, which have been operated either as separate
units or have been absorbed by the banks i n the group. In addition, lb new
branches have been established over this period. On December 31, 1933# this
group served
towns; as of December
l$L\6, this number had been increased
to 379* These figures relate only to Transamerica1s banking operations. In
addition, i t owns and operates many other types of business with aggregate resources of more than #275*000,000.
Section 6 of 3. 829 would make i t impossible for this or any other
holding company system, to reach out and absorb more and more banks without
f i r s t obtaining tho approval of some agency of the Federal Government. Under
this section any direct purchase of the stock or assets of banks by a bank
holding company would have to bo approved by the Board. I f one of the banks
i n a holding company group wished to acquiro the assets of a bank, the acquiring
bank, i f a national bank, would have to secure the approval of the Comptroller)
i f a State member bank, i t would have to obtain approval by the Board; i f a nonmember bank, - i t would have to obtain tho approval of the PDIC.
The proposed b i l l also enumerates tho standards which would guide the
banking agencies i n deciding whether to approve such acquisitions. First, they
would have to consider the financial history and condition of the applicant and
the banks concerned; their prospects; character of management; and the needs of
the communities involved. These are tho considerations which are today the
legislative guide f o r administrative aotion i n such matters as the admission of
State banks to membership i n the Federal Reserve System and the granting of
deposit insurance coverage. Next, they would take into consideration national
policy against restraints of trado and comnerco and the undue concentration of
economic power. This would give effect to tho anti-monopoly objectives stated
i n the Sherman and Clayton Acts. Finally, under an amendment suggested by the
Federal Advisory Council and the Reserve City Bankers, they would consider
whether an acquisition, regardless of i t s competitive effect, would extend the
operations of a holding company beyond limits consistent with adequate and sound
banking.
The Board believes that these standards would furnish an adequate
guide for administrative action. Much consideration was given to various proposals on the subject, including the fixing of r i g i d , even mathematical,
formulas governing expansion, but the Board concluded that such definitions
would make the section d i f f i c u l t to enforce from an administrative standpoint,
and, as indicated by representatives of the Justice Department, might conflict
with existing governmental policy respecting the antitrust statutes. Under the
board's proposals, each case would stand on its own merits, considered in the
light of standards which are deeply rooted i n American traditions.
KESaAIKIKG PROVISIONS
The remaining regulatory provisions of S. 829 require l i t t l e discussion. The bank holding company would be required to register with the Board
and to f i l e periodic reports. I t would be subject to examination as are each of
i t s subsidiaries. Existing provisions of law respecting the maintenance of re~
serves by bank holding companies would be carried over and made a part of the
proposed new low. Upstream loans between a bank and i t s holding company would
Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

- 7 be regulated, as well as loans involving the securities of the holding company
aid its other subsidiaries. The Board would be authorized to scrutinize the
terms of any management or service contracts between a holding company and its
banks. Finally, the Board would be authorized to make such rules, regulations,
and orders as mjtght be necessary to enable i t to administer and carry out the
purposes of the Act.
The proposed legislation for the f i r s t time to my knowledge in any
Federal bonking statute contains a provision granting; a statutory right of
judicial review to any. one aggrieved by any action of the Board taken under
any of the various regulatory provisions of the b i l l . This provision should
help to crystallize at on early date the precise boundaries of Board authority
under those sections involving the application of administrative discretion.

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

