Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

ADDRESS AT MEETING OF
NATIONAL INDUSTRIAL CONFERENCE BOARD
NEW YORK CITY
THURSDAY EVENING, NOVEMBER 1 6 , 1 9 ^

BY
MARRINER S .

ECCLES

THE POSTWAR PRICE PROBLEM - INFLATION OR DEFLATION

FOR RELEASE I N MORNING NEWSPAPERS OF
•

"•

'•

••'

» ""•

' '•• *•!"•»>'

IP

•

mi

I'm

•

• •!••

»•')•«•

FRIDAY, NOVEMBER 1 7 ,

H I

19Wl

'»'¥"

'P

'I

Dr* Jordan, Members and Guests of the Conference Board?
This will be the fourth time you have done me the honor to ask
me to be a speaker at one of your sessions* I had supposed that the first
time would be my last* My best friends tell me that I do not have the most
important qualification of a public speaker, namely, the faculty of saying
what audiences like to hear* ' So it is a great consolation to know th$t even
though you may not have liked some of the things I felt ought to be said,
you have invited me again and again and again.
Postwar is still some time in the future. We have come a long way
on the battlefronts, but the obstacles still to be overcome are grim and
formidable* Here at home we must continue to provide our armed forces and
our allies with equipment and supplies in*undiminished volume* That is our
first job* We must not be diverted from it* Nevertheless, if we are to win
the peace as well as the war, we must know where we are going when war no
longer is the driving force of the economy*
In less than four year? this Nation has accomplished a miraole
of production* At the same time we have had a remarkable degree of economic
stability* All of us have seen the miracle happen —• many of you helped
greatly to bring it about -~ although at times some have lost sight of it
in criticism of details* The problems have been and still are staggering*
Nevertheless, under Government direction, program after program has been
put through successfully* The vast cooperative achievement of our people —
industry, labor, agriculture, and all other groups —• was only possible because of Government organization of united effort, Government planning,
Government financing, and Government settlement of countless conflicts of
interest on the economic front* Within this framework, the accomplishments
of industry have been tremendous* The over-all results have been magnificent*
There have been withdrawn for armed service well over 11 million
men and women in the most productive age groups* At the same time we have
increased the total output of our country to 75 P e r cent above 1939 levels*
We are supplying goods and services in support of the war effort at a rate
of about 85 billion dollars a year* At the same time, output for civilian
use is valued at about 110 billions* Nearly one-fourth of our food
production is going to our armed forces and our allies* Per capita
civilian consumption of food is well above the prewar level* While fighting the greatest war in history, the country has succeeded in raising the
standard of living for the population as a whole above the level of any
peacetime year* Moreover, we have created many new industries or greatly
expanded existing ones — for examplef magnesium, synthetic rubber, shipbuilding and aircraft* We are producing planes at the astounding rate of
100,000 a year* Before the war we imported nearly all our rubber* Our
annual production of rubber now exceeds our imports of rubber before the
war* This production record has been achieved by a net increase of about
6 million or less than 15 per cent in civilian employment, combined with a
substantial increase in hours of work and more intensive effort*

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

- 2 I mention these facts because they so vividly reveal the magnitude
of our postwar job if we are to continue to keep our productive resources
fully employed« Having experienced an output of goods and services of nearly
200 billion dollars during the war, the people of thi$ oountry will not be
satisfied with a peacetime output of 125 to 150 billions.• Having experienced
several years of full employment, the people will not tolerate mass unemployment* They will not accept the expIsolations, so often heard in the past,
that flwe cannot afford it", or that it is economically unsound for the Government to intervene, or that we must have faith in eventual rescue through
"natural forces"•
The question before this Conference is, "Postwar Price Problem Inflation or Deflation?". The question so stated implies that we have a
choice between one or the other. But if we have inflation, we shall certainly
have deflation following itf Thus we may be faced with having both. However,
if we avoid inflation, we shall still face the danger of deflation. If, in
the period of transition from war to peace, we fail to maintain wartime price
controls and rationing until civilian goods become available in adequate
quantities, an inflationaxy situation may well develop. If, later on, we fail
to raise the flow of consumers' expenditures greatly above prewar levels, de*flation will be inevitable. The danger of inflation in the transition period
can surely be met. The danger of deflation presents a vastly more difficult
problem. To solve itt will be the main challenge to our postwar economy.
Nobody can foretell how strong inflationary pressures will be
during the transition from war to peace* Inflation pressures include the
pent-up demand for consumers durable goods and housing; continued shortages
of certain food and clothing items; the huge volume of liquid assets in the
hands of the public; a potentially large foreign demand; and, finally, the
peoplefs desire to return to normal and to get rid of wartime controls once
victory is won. The longer the wur lasts, the greater the danger of inflation
will be because of the cumulative increase in pent-up demand for civilian goods
and in liquid assets in the hands of the public.
However, at the same time there will be deflationaxy pressures working in the opposite direction. There will be large reductions in war expenditures creating unemployment in war industries. Demobilized war veterans will
be added to the civilian labor force. There will be large stock piles of
many raw materials. Uncertainty about future employment will deter many
people from drawing on their savings or spending as much as they otherwise
would out' of their current income. Similar uncertainty will delay business
expenditures. Many other factors in the situation, as the war ends, will add
to the mixture of inflationary and deflationary forces.
Because of the uncertainties pf the transition period, price and
fiscal controls should be kept intact until industry has resumed civilian

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

- 3production on a scale adequate to meet demand. Only thereby can the consumer
be assured that he will not lose by postponing purchases and that* the purchasing value of his savings will be protected. This* is vital because of the
huge volume of liquid savings accumulated in the hands of the public as a result of war financing. If these savings are, used prematurely through fear of
impending price increases, they would be a destructive inflationary force.
Unless the program fpr the transition period is carefully planned
and carried out, the long-run 'economic problem? 'of the country will be vastly
more difficult to meet. Just as the difficulties of the 1930fs were due -to
the failure of the policies of the 1920fs, so will ou'r postwar situation be
determined largely by the job we do in the transition 'period.
For example, we may expand our industrial plant too greatly and in
the wrong directions in an effort to satisfy too quickly the huge backlog of
demands. These demands will include not only the large pent-up need for con-'
sumers durable goods, capital goods and public works, but also for large foreign
demands, Instead of meeting these demands at once, prudent policy calls for
satisfying them in a more gradual and orderly manner so that when these accumulated forces are expended, there will not be a sharp and sudden drtfp with
serious deflationary consequences. It is better to ration, control prices,
restrain credit expansion, and delay deferable public works or foreign loans
in this period than to have an unsustainable over-extension. It is most
important during this transition period, while we have the sustaining power of
backlog demands, to adopt policies designed to lay the groundwork for the
higher standards of living wo must have later on. These policies should include, among other things, a Social Security program covering all of our people
and providing adequate benefits; a modified tax structure; maintenance of low
rates of interest to encourage new investment, including housing; and the
planning of Federal, State and local public works to be undertaken when the
need to provide additional employment develops. It is at this time, when the
backlog of deferred need has been largely met and we must rely upon current
demand, that we shall face the most difficult tebt of our ability to prevent'
deflation an$ mass unemployment.
On the average this year about 52 million civilians are employed.
In. addition, more than 11 millions are in the armed forces, making a total of
more than 63 millions, or neerly one-half of our total population. After the
war, a substantial number of people attracted to the la&or force during the
war will retire or return to school or housework. A rich country such as ours
can afford to give its young people adequate education and to provide retirement for its older people. But even after making full allowance for probable
withdrawals from the labor force, it is evident that more people will be available for work in peacetime,activities than are now employed.
What does this mean in terms of
has been conservatively estimated that in
ment in the second year after victory, we
services ,amounting to 170 billion dollars
and efficiency increase, this figure will

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

production in the postwar years? It
order,to have reasonably full employwill need to produce goods and
at 19U3 prices. As the labor force
have to be revised upward.

-uYet, even a 170-billion-dollar total reflects a volume of output
vastly above that of 1939* In order to visualize what 170 billion dollars of
expenditures means, lotfs divide as follows: 110 billion dollars in consumers
goods and services , 25 billion dollars in*plant, equipment, housing and other
new investments, and 35 billion ddllars in goods and services supplied by
Federal, State and local governments.
Allowing for price advances sincfe 1939 # these figures mean, for example, that as compared with 1939 we will need to have I
4
O per, cent more in consumers goods and services, nearly twice as much in plant, equipment, housing
and other new investment, and double the total of public expenditures.
These are challenging figures. They are significant not because they
are in any sense a forecast. They are significant because they indicate the
general magnitude of the job that lios ahead of us. It is apparent that we must
aim high; that we can never go back. If we were to return to 1939 levels of
production, from 15 to 20 millions of our postwar labor »force would be without
jobs, an intolerable situation. Many of those without jobs would be veterans
of this war.
We should be able to agree in substantial measure on a relatively
simple statement of what our postwar economic problem will be once we are beyond the difficult period of reconversion and the backlog of needs accumulated
during the war has been satisfied. The over-all economic problem may be defined in this way; In order for 56 million workers to have jobs, enough money
must be spent to buy the output of 56 million workers. Production large enough
to employ substantially all workers is possible only if the total income which
is received is either spent on consumers goods and services or is saved and
goes into new investment directly or indirectly. Savings which are invested are
returned to the stream of expenditures and thus continue to give employment.
Savings that are held idle or•used to bid up prices of existing assets do not.
If the flow of income back into the expenditure stream is interrupted, demand
Becomes insufficient to take off the market what is produced at full employment.
As a result, production, income and employment inevitably decline. To assure a
sufficient flow of expenditures is, first of all, the responsibility of the
people and businesses who receive income and who decide how to use it. But there
are millions of income recipients and millions of businesses in our country, and
there'is no assurance that a sufficient~amount of expenditures will come forth
in a steady "stream. If the purchases and investments of the people are not
sufficient to buy the goods- and services provided by full employment, then
cumulative deflation and unemployment will develop unless the Government steps
in and provides a sufficient volume of total expenditures*
The larger .the unused savings, the larger must Government expenditures
be to overcome the deficiency in private spending and investment. The Government has two ways of channeling idle savings back into the income stream, that
is, either through taxation or through borrowing. As between the two, I believe
that taxation must carry the main burden. I would be most hesitant to see
further additions to the public debt after the war. ' In this respect, the post-

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

~5 war picture will differ greatly from that in. the early 1930fswhen the economy
had undergone a drastic deflation and large Government deficits we're not only
unavoidable, but it was desirable to replenish a contracted money supply# An
entirely different situation will exist after this, war* Upon the termination
of the war, the total volume of currency, bank deposits and. Government securities, which are the equivalent of cash, will be far more than adequate as a
basis for the purchasing power needed to provide full employment.
A more direct approach than deficit financing should be found in order
to maintain necessary expenditures. Since we cannot afford, in the postwar
economy, to have widespread unemployment, it will be essential, if all other
methods' of providing employment*fail, to have the Government underwrite employment through' borrowing the unspent savings of the people,and ^returning them to
the income stream. However, this should be a last recourse. A much more satisfactory approach wotild be to bring.about the necessary increase in the flow of
expenditures- by other means, for example, by an extension of the Social Security
program arid by appropriate tax policies that wou^d induce* more spending and reduce idle savings«
A high level of consumers1 expenditures is the basic requirement for
postwar prosperity* The consumer is the real employer. If he receives adequate
income, business has a buyer for its products, and having a buyer for its
products, it has jobs for the workers. If the consumer does not buy, the markets
for the output of business shrink and total income (and employment fall off.
Mudh can be done to increase consumption 'through a much broader Social
Security system. The Government should underwrite and guarantee a national
minimum of income, education, health and old-age security for all citizens. By
so doing, the Government can place a floor of purchasing power under the* economy.
This in turn will place a floor under the market for the goods and services of
business, industry, and agriculture. Decent minimum levels of income will them<selves help to achieve and maintain full employment. Our productive capacity,is
so great that such minimum standards will not be a strain nor will they impose a
dead level of uniformity. Ample room will be left for most people to raise
their incomes far above these minimum levels. Postwar social security benefits
should not be based upon further additions to the payroll tax, but should be
paid for out of the general budget, because a tax on payrolls is a tax on consumption and, therefore, undesirable when more consumption is needed.
The Federal budget is not likely to be less than 25 billion dollars a
year after the war, or about three times the prewar level of 1939» If we succeed in maintaining full employment, however, a budget of this size, in order
to be balanced, will not require tax rates to be three times as high as before
th£~war because the income base will be far larger. The higher the national
income, the easier it will be to pay for the costs of Governments It is doubly
important, therefore, to recognize the close relationship between the way in
which our taxes are collected and the flow of income from which they are drawn.
Our postwar tax'system should be designed to induce a high level of consumers1
expenditures. Accordingly, the first requirement should be a drastic reduction

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

-6 in excise taxes because they tax consumption and thus undermine the markets
for business* Secondly, personal income taxes upon the lower income group
should be reduced by increasing exemptions*
There is no lack of need for everything that we can produce* There
are still a great many people in this country whose standard of living is
shamefully inadequate. The basic problem is to see that the necessary purchasing power flows into the hands of those who will use it to increase their
standard of living* An adequate Social Security program as well as assured
employment will do much to induce the spending of current income and thus increase the standard of living*
A high level of consumers1 expenditures is not possible without a
large volume of wage and salary income* If pur economy is to operate at full
capacity, average wage and salary incomes must be high enough at normal hours
of work to give the people sufficient purchasing power to take the product off
the market* Again ifte significance of this foi* the postwar adjustment is
evident* "When, after the war, hours return to normal and overtime pay is discontinued, total wage and salary income will decline sharply* If we aro to
avoid sharply declining prices and loss of markets which discourage production
and business expansion, a gradual upward adjustment will be necessary in the
wages and salaries of the great mass of comparatively lower paid workers*
Increases in productivity should be passed on to the public largely
in the form of higher wages and salaries and should not be added to profits*
In those industries in which productivity is increasing much faster than
average, prices should be reduced in order to reach larger mass markets*
Throughout, prices should be set on the basis of narrow margins per unit of
output*
Once a high level of consumer expenditure is assured, the foundation
for investment expenditures of business will be laid* Investment expenditures
are made in anticipation of consumer demands and are not likely to be made unless business is assured in advance of an adequate market* We hear much about
the reluctance ot 'business men to take risks and engage in new ventures because
of lack of confidence* However, business confidence is an effect and not a
cause* It will exist if there are markets to look forward to; it will not
exist if markets are lacking*
To assure adequate total purchasing power, it is necessary for business to disburse the funds which it receives from the buyers of its product*
Corporate profits that are not used for capital expansion should be passed on
to thvi workers or the owners, and thus returned to tho expenditure stream* Depreciation and depletion reserves which accumulate as idle balances similarly
constitute a drain on tho* expenditure stream* Currency, deposits and Government securities held by businesses other than banks and insurance companies
have increased from about 2k billions in 19Ul to the unprecedented* total of4
66 billion dollars* They should not continue to increase after the war because, as I have emphasized, business receipts must be respent currently to
help sustain full production ana employment*

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

7There is much discussion today in favor of reducing corporate tax*
ation after the war* To the extent that this reflects a recognition that
taxes are an instrument,of economic control, I welcome the discussion because
I# have long contended that fiscal policy is the most .important single Instrument through which the Government may influence economic conditions* I believe, however, that much of the current discussion is in the realm of wishful
thinking because the revenue objective is set entirely too low* Also, I believe that removal of various excise taxes and a reduction of income taxes on
the lower income groups should come first* Once this has been done and revenue
needs permit, I would favor a reduction in the corporation income tax* The
rate might be lowered to 25 op 30 par cent and the corporation permitted to take
out of its taxable income that part .
o
f its profits' whioh it distributes as dividends* This would remove double taxation of dividends and be an inducement for
corporations to distribute their earnings* Some provision could be made to
allow small corporations to retain needed funds without tax penalty* The excess
profits tax with its carry-over and carry-back provisions should be retained for
some time after the war at a reduoed rate of around 65 per cent* High profits
that will be earned in that period are traceable to backlog demands and are thus
in the nature of war profits*
As a further encouragement to small business enterprise, provision
should also be .made for substantial tax benefits* This would stimulate investment in small end independent enterprises* It would be the most effective way
to make equity capital available to them and. be of far greater help than to pro*
vide too much easy credit* Encouragement.of small enterprise is essential not
only for economic reasonsi but to vitalise our democratic institutions and help
k$ep alive the spirit; of American enterprise*
Our economic problems must bo worked out et home* There has been, in
recent discussion* too much reliance on the stimulus to our domestic prosperity
which may result from world trade. International cooperation is essential and
international agreements, suclj as those planned at Bretton Woods, are desirable*
,Yet, we must not forget that the lev^l of postwar employment in the United States
will depend primarily upon the existence of domestic markets for our products*
Our first responsibility is full employment at home and achieving it is the most
powerful contribution we can make to a prosperous world economy*
In the period ahead, we should keep constantly in mind that this is a
200-*billion-dollar a year country* We all know by now that we cannot gain by
fighting over shares of a small total output* In 1932 when many millions were
unemployed, corporations- as a whole lost nearly 3-1/2 billions and net current
income of farm operators amounted to. less than 2 billions* In 19U3 with full
employment, corporations, after tax liabilities of ab.out 15 billions, had net incomes of nearly, 9 billion* dollars, an all-time hi#w Similarly, net current income of farm operators amounted to more tjaaa 12 billions, likewise an all-time
high* There is no, profit in goods that are not produced* On the other hand,
we all gain from a larger total output*

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

* 8 *

I have sought to outline tonight the principal economic factors in
prospect and the approach to the solution of our postwar problems which I believe promises the best hope of success. Such suggestions as I have made are,
of course, only a part of a comprehensive long-run program for full employment*
The objectives of such a program may be summed up as follows:
To maintain full and stable national production, income and
employment to the maximum possible extent through encouraging the
expansion of private enterprise.
To guarantee minimum standards of health, education, and
personal security for all members of tho community.
To provide for a steadily rising standard of living for the
Nation as a whole by development of our economic resources and by
improving the efficiency witii which they are used.
To promote a high level of world prosperity and world trade
in cooperation with other nations.
There will*not be much disagreement today among thoughtful people, regardless of political faith or economic background, on these goals of national
economic policy. Modern governments, including our own, have long since assumed
a primary responsibility for the economic guidance and progress of their peoples.
A highly developed nation like our own, with demonstrated capacity for providing
a standard of living fox4 all of the people far higher than anything wo have ever
known, can well afford to provide a national minimum of income, education, health
and old-age security for all of the population. It cannot afford to do less.
Such a guarantee is not the impractical dream of the social reformer.
It is essential for our national economic security and for protection of what we
call our free enterprise system. It will go far to protect our economy against
slumps. It will stimulate mass consumption, widen the markets for private enterprise, and' thus open the way for new investment. It is absolutely necessary for
the preservation of this democracy and this economic system of ours. Only defeatists today in the face of the war record will say that the goals of full e
m
*
ployment are impossible of attainment under our economic system and form of
government.
Eleven millions of the youth of this Nation now serving in the armed
forces are not likely to believe that we cannot afford in peace as ifc-war to
provide jobs for able and willing workers. They are well aware of all of the
talk about postwar planning, and if they are impatient with it now because they
think it shows an unawareness of all of the bitter fighting that remains to be
done, they will be far less tolerant if, when they come home, they find the
planning and the -talk about free enterprise and fully employment are only amirage.

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

9How many will never come home, how many will return maimed for life —
we do not yet know. We do know that it is these 11 millions who are risking and
losing everything to save this system of ours* We do know that the good intentions of a few years ago about taking the profit out of war look rattier like
a mockery today. We do know that these 11 millions have not shared in the
veritable war boom which has enriched the homefront. They have given up homes,
jobs, businesses, and life itself. Those who have stayed at home, safe and
protected, have been provided with a higher over-all standard of living than
the Nation has ever before enjoyed. They have accumulated the greatest volume
of savings in our history* Farmers, workers, corporations* business men have
on the whole higher salaries and wages, more profits, more savings and fewer
debts than ever before. Mqst of this has come out of an expanding, already
mountainous, national debt*
The stay-at-homes — you and I — own the shares in that debt* We
will get the interest and be paid the principal on that debt when we want it.
The 11 millions — those who survive — will have to help shoulder that mountain
of debt of. tmhich we stay-at-homes are the principal owners* They may be quite
willing to do so if they have adequate jobs and economic security* You and I
should have imagination enough to realize what would happen if we on the homefront, who have profited so much and risked so little — while they have risked
so much and profited so little — if those"who have the economic power or the
political power in this country accept the defeatism still expressed by some to
the effect that the country cannot afford the goal of full employment because
the dictates of so-called t!sound finance" stand in the way* I cannot imagine
more unsound finance or a plainer proof that we do not at heart believe in our
system or in our democracy*
Those who have overcome
war are not defeatists. Jf we at
mand and throw the defeatists out
responsibility — and I, for one,
need not happen that way*

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

the most terrible of obstacles to win this
home fail them, they will rightly take comof public and private places of power and
would be all for helping them to do it* It

