Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

RADIO ADDRESS
OF
MARRINER S . ECCLES
CHAIRMAN, BOARD OF GOVERNORS
OF THE

FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM

ON THE
NATIONAL RADIO FORUM
CONDUCTED BY
THE WASHINGTON EVENING STAR

BROADCAST OVER THE
BLUE NETWORK (STATION WMAL)
WEDNESDAY,
APRIL lU, \9ky
AT

IOJJC

PtM.

For r e l e a s e i n morning newspapers of
Thursday, April Vyt Y)U}

The Government will spend, for war purposes alone, approximately
90 billion dollars during the present calendar year.
The goal of the Second War Loan Drive, which opened on Monday, is
to raise 13 billion dollars, or about one-seventh of the total war expenditures for this year. The general public, exclusive of the commercial banksf
is being asked to subscribe not less than 8 billions of this amount* Eight
billions is a lot of money, yet it is less than the American people are now
receiving every three weeks in national income, consisting mainly of wages
and salaries, including farm income.
The question is not whether the goal of this campaign will be
reached, but how it will be reached. The Government can always raise the
money it needs. What is of vital importance to every man, woman and child
in this country is that the money needed to wage this war be raised in a
way that will not result in a disastrous rise in the cost of living.
On the basis of our present tax laws, we will collect in taxes
somewhat less than one-third of our total Government requirements this yearf
The balance, or about 70 billion dollars, will have to be borrowed.
There are two sources from which the Government can borrow. One
source is the general public 1 that is, all of the people of this nation and
their innumerable business concerns, together with all the various public as
well as private organizations. The other source is the commercial banking
system of the country and the Federal Reserve Banks.
The distinction between the two sources of borrowing is of
critical importance in the battle against inflation. Borrowing from the
general public diverts to war purposes money that might otherwise be spent
in driving up the cost of living. Borrowing from the commercial banks, in*stead of diverting existing purchasing power to the war effort, creates entirely new funds, new purchasing powerf These are the most dangerous of
dollars. We have been creating altogether too many of them.
In the calendar year of 19U2 the Government spent about 5& billion
dollars. Only about one-third was raised in taxes. The rest had to be bor-*
rowed* Less than half of the borrowing came from the general public. More
than half came from the commercial banks. As a result, more than 20 billion
dollars was added to our money supply *
•
•
* to demand deposits and currency.
Unless we do much better in the current year, 30 billion dollars more will be
added to our money supply in the same way. That would mean an increase of
more than 50 Million dollars, or a doubling of our money supply, in two years*
«

Fifty billions of these dangerous inflationary dollars in two years'
time! In the last war, and even at the peak of 1929/ our total money supply
was less than 30 billions.'

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

- 2 I emphasize these figures to bring out as forcibly as I can why
it is so important, if we are to hold the line against inflation, to finance
this war to the fullest possible extent by taxation and by borrowing from the
srurrent incomes of the general public. To the extent that taxes are not provided to cover the costs of war, the money has to be borrowed* To the extent
that the money is borrowed from the general pxjblic, the inflationary pressures
of our enormously expanded national income are reduced* To the extent that we
fail to tax sufficiently, or fail to borrow enough from the general public,
then there is no alternative except to borrow from the commercial banks or the
Federal Reserve Banks* To the extent that the money is borrowed from either,
more purchasing power is poured into the already dangerously swollen stream*
That is the high road to inflation*
Let us look at the economic picture for a moment from another
angle* More than half of our total production this year is going for war,
leaving less than half available for purchase by civilians who nevertheless
are receiving incomes based on the total production. It is apparent, therefore, that there are not and cannot be goods and services available for more
than half of this income to purchase. To the extent that this surplus income bids for the existing supply of goods, it subjects the price ceilings
t* irresistible inflationary pressures. No Government edict or agency can
hold prices indefinitely against such pressures* The only way to reduce
these pressures is to transfer the surplus income to the Government through
taxes or borrowing from the general public*
The way to
and more threatening
profits and prices*
to the goods that we
more dollars for the

prevent these pressures from growing constantly greater
is to avoid all further increases in wages, salaries,
Increasing the dollars we receive will pot add one iota
can buy* We are only fooling ourselves by exchanging
same or a smaller amount of goods*

The gap between what the public is receiving in spendable income
and what is available to fcuy is constantly enlarging as more is produced
for war and less for civilians* As more is spent for war, civilian incomes
go up, but civilian supplies go down. Accordingly, there is no sensible
choice before us, if we are to ward off inflationary dangers, except to keep
as close a balance as possible between the amount of money which is bidding
for civilian goods and services and the available supply. This means that
instead of buying more, despite enlarged incomes, we must of necessity buy
less and less* It means that far from increasing the standard of living today, we must be prepared to cut it to the bone. Too many of our people have
already increased or are still trying to increase their living standards.
They must be awakened to the fact that this spells peril to themselves and
to the nation* As our war effort continues to expand, it will not be enough
merely t
<
* buy only what we need. We will have to scale down our ideas of
what we need and scale up our ideas of what we can do without.

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

- 3Since the additional, taxation necessary to reduce excessive buying power is not in immediate prospect, it is all the more important that
it be reduced by borrowing from the public. It is all the more reason why
every effort should be made in this and subsequent drives to obtain as much
as possible by the sale of Government securities to all non-bank investors
and as little as possible by borrowing from the commercial banks* We must
do far better than we did in the December drive, when the number of nonbanking investors, excluding the purchasers of Series "Eff Savings Bonds,
reached the insignificant total of less than 350.000*
I recognize that many individuals as well as business concerns have
not shared in the general rise in incomes resulting from war expenditures*
They cannot be expected to do as much as those who, directly and indirectly,
are the beneficiaries of the enormous outpouring of funds* Nevertheless,
they have a duty to invest to the very limit of their ability* The great
majority of our'people — except the boys in the armed services — are
sharing in the rising tide of income* Payrolls, farm incomes, as well as
many business profits, are at record high levels. National income, already
close to 60 billions above the peak of 1929* is still expanding* Young
people, old people, women previously unemployed, have been added to payrolls*
A triple expansion of incomes is going on as a result of increased employment,
increased pay rates, increased hours and overtime pay*
This great majority of our people, individuals as well as business
corporations, who are the direct and indirect beneficiaries of our war expenditures should be the first to subscribe to war bonds in an amount com~
mensurate with their increased incomes* In some cases, incomes have expanded by more than one hundred per cent* Many sincerely believe that they
have done their full duty when they have subscribed ten per cent of their
incomes to war bonds* But if the Government is to succeed in borrowing the
amount it needs to borrow from the general public, if those who have profited
greatly from our war expenditures are to discharge their full obligation, ten
per cent will not be nearly enough* Far more must be invested in war bonds.
The ideal expressed in the familiar phrase, "Take the profit out
of war," should be always before us, and we should strive to come as close
to it as possible* To achieve it, we would have to recapture from the war
beneficiaries through taxation the equivalent of every dollar expended for
the war* We cannot, of course, achieve this ideal, but we should at least
do as well as other nations at war •
* and they are collecting more than
one-half of their expenditures from taxes* We are collecting less than a
third* We must have increased tax rates, an£ we urgently need, without
further delay, a heavy withholding tax in order to collect at the source
potentially inflationary funds before they reach the spending stream or
elude the tax collector altogether*
The success of this present drive is not measurable by the raising
of 13 billion dollars. That in itself is no problem, since the money can

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

-1
; always be obtained through the inflationary medium of borrowing from the
commercial banks or the Federal Reserve Banks• The measure of success of
this drive will be the amount of money that is subscribed by individuals and
by corporations other than banks, and the number of subscribers who participate* The money is there to get.T It is estimated that even after paying
this year's taxes, combined individual savings and corporate accumulations
will aggregate 70 billion dollars — JO billions more than in 19U2*
In this drive, the Treasury is seeking to obtain only eight of
the thirteen billions from non-bank investors. In the future we must get
an increasingly large proportion from the general public, and rely much
less upon the commercial banks. This result can only be achieved, however,
if the public has a better understanding of the urgent necessity for
financing this war by non-inflationary methods. And this, in turn, will depend upon the organization and the educational and selling efforts developed
by those responsible for carrying through the Government's financing program*
Several hundred thousand volunteer workers are giving their time
and energies to the present drive. They will figuratively, if not literally,
ring every doorbell in the country. These men and women who call on you are
volunteer workers. You do yourselves, not them, a favor by responding to
the limit of your ability. You are just as much a part of this campaign as
they are. Its success is just as important to you and to your future as it
is to theitu If you do not happen to be called upon, it does not relieve you
of the duty to do your part in this campaign by voluntarily subscribing.
You can do so by going to th$ nearest bank or p&st office, or to any other
issuing agency in your community.
Every one of us has a role to play in this and subsequent drives,
for they are as necessary to protect the home front as successive drives on
the fighting front are necessary to win this war. Every commercial bank in
this country has a particular responsibility to urge all of its customers
to buy Government securities, using their bank balances as well as all currency beyond what is absolutely necessary for pocket money. Much more currency is outstanding today than is necessary* Bvery dollar that is needlessly kept idle on deposit, in your pocket, or in some hideaway, is not at
work and not at war. To the extent that these dollars are not loaned to
your Government, other dollars must be found or must be created to do the
work they are not doing. Invested in Government bonds, they go to war.
They become dangerous to the enemy instead of to us ?
The dollars you put into war bonds will be safe and will earn
interest. Your dollars are always obtainable because war bonds can be
readily converted into cash. However, unless urgent need arises, every
effort should be made to hold them to maturity. To the extent they are
cashed, the vital part they play in reducing excessive buying power, as well
as in financing the war, is undone.

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

- 5Every banker who does not already have a war loan account for the
Government should arrange for one thro\igh the Federal Reserve Bank of his
district* He can then deposit to the Governments credit in his bank the
proceeds from the Government securities purchased by his customers as well
as by his bank* The Treasury draws on these accounts gradually as the Government spends the money* The money is thus returned to the community and is in
turn re-deposited in the banking system as rapidly as the Government draws it
out of the banking system.
The Government bonds you buy are a claim on future production — a
share in the abundance that we cannot have for civilian use when we are fighting a total war., but can have in peace times* The dollars you invest now are
stored up purchasing power which may be needed after our industry has been
fully converted from war to peace product!on* Then your buying power will
serve to sustain employment and prevent deflation* Every dollar you spend to-day beyond your absolute necessities only helps to make a breach in the line
we are striving to hold against the deadly enemy of inflation*
We must all understand that paying taxes, buying war bonds, refraining from a mad scramble for scarce things now, postponing buying so far as
possible while we are at war, opposing wage~salary~price^and-profit~increases
and otherwise actively supporting the fight against inflation, are all part
and parcel of the vitally important defense of the home front*
Profiteering from war is intolerable and unpatrioticf There is no
profiteering on the battle front* Waste of money or of manpower, hoarding or
squandering of materials, atfe equally ineompatible with successful prosecution
of the war or defense of the home front* In the gigantic effort this nation
is making, some waste is inevitable* but it should be stamped out wherever
possible, whether in civilian or public affairs,, among military as well as
civil authorities* Nevertheless, complaints on'this score are no justification for giving less than full support to your Government in this campaign
and in all its war effort* Out of every dollar the Government is spending,
96 cents goes to fight this war and to pay interest on the public debt.
This is total war, and the war bonds we must invest in, the taxes we
must pay, the interferences we must endure in our normal way of life, are inseparably bound up with the mobilizing of our maximum striking power on the
battle fronts* What you •
*
- what all of us do •
* in protecting the home front
not only helps to win this war, but you and I will deserve qnly the contempt
of our fighting forces if they come home, after winning the victory, to a land
that we were too dull, too weak, too soft, and too selfish to save from economic chaos* That must not happen here*
You — all of us «
*
•
- on the home front have
we have yet done* If the sacrifices of war could be
equity, nobody would be better off because he stayed
home, are accountable to the millions who are making
to the last full measure of devotion*

much to do., much more than
apportioned with strict
at home* We, who stay at
the real sacrifices, even

You are asked to lend your dollars — not to give your lives -- to
your country*
'
Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

