BOARD OF GOVERNORS
OF THE
FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
Statement for the Press
For immediate release

February 17 # 19U3

Statement of M» S« Eccles, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System, before the Banking and Currency Committee of
the Senate on S.700, a bill to amend sections 12B and 19 of the
Federal Reserve Act,

Mr. Chairman and members of the Committee;
This measure provides that for the duration of the war and six
months thereafter so-called War Loan Peposit Accounts shall be relieved
from Federal deposit insurance assessments and from reserve requirements.
It$ enactment will help to perfect the machinery for and thus facilitate
and make smoother tho Government's war-financing operations.
I should like to state as simply as I can what the bill does
and why its enactment is important at this time. It is not a complex
matter, and I see no reason why it should arouse controversy. The bill
has the approval of the Treasury, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, and the System's Open Market Committee.
As members of the Senate Committee will recall0 war loan accounts were originally authorized by the Liberty Loan Acts in the last
war and are now authorized by the Second Liberty Loan A®t as amended.
This Act provides that the Secretary of the Treasury may deposit "in
such incorporated banks and trust companies as he may designate, the proceeds or any part thereof, arising from the sale of the bonds and certificates of indebtedness, Treasury bills and war savings certificates authorized by this Act . . ."
Incorporated banks and trust companies may qualify for war loan
accounts by applying^to the Treasury through the Federal Reserve Banks•
Such accounts are fully secured by a pledge of assets for a stipulated
amount which is the maximum that may be on deposit in the account at any
one time.
"When banks which have qualified for war loan accounts subscribe
to Government securities for their customers or themselves, they enter
the amount of their allotted subscriptions in the war loan accounts on the
payment dates and subject to call by the Treasury, Subsequently, as the
Treasury has need for funds, a call is issued; that is, notice is given to

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

• 2

-

these banks to transfer to their respective Federal Reserve Banks whatever percentage of the funds in the war loan accounts is required by the
Treasury to meet its current expenditures. Thus the war loan accounts
are drawn down gradually as Treasury needs arise, the money is checked
out of the Reserve Banks by the Treasury and ultimately flows back again
to the banking system as deposits.
If there were no such mechanism -- if all banks in subscribing
to Government securities for their customers or themselves were to trans*fer the funds immediately to the Reserve Banks
there would be periodic
heavy drains on the deposit totals of the banking system, with seriously
disruptive effects on the economy, particularly on the Government bond
market. The larger the financing operation, the greater and more disruptive the drain would be. In peacetimes when the Government was not
compelled to raise and expend such huge sums as are demanded by the war
and when banks had superabundant reserves, the situation was very different.
But today when the Treasury must go to the public and to the money market
for large sums of money every few months, and when reserves are rapidly
absorbed as currency in circulation expands and bank deposits increase,
it is Very important to extend the war loan deposit mechanism as widely
as possible throughout the banking system.
If there were no such mechanism, it would be necessary to pump
billions of reserves into the banking system to offset the heavy drains
at financing periods and thus prevent widespread liquidation with the
disturbance this would cause in the bond market. Then as the funds were
spent by the Government and flowed back into bank deposits, the reserves
that had been pumped in would be excessive relative to the current need.
Any such alternating scarcity .and redundancy of reserve funds would
create difficult problems for the Treasury and the Reserve System*
To the extent that the war loan account mechanism exists
throughout the banking system, such difficulties can be avoided and the
flow of deposit resources into the war loan accounts, then to the Reserve
Banks as the Treasury needs and calls for the money, then back into the
banking system as the Treasury expends the money, is accomplished smoothly
and without disruptive effects. There is a close adjustment and a minimum
time lag between the drawing down of the money and its flow back into the
deposit structure.
Because of these considerations, the Reserve System has made a
special effort and a concerted drive through all of the Reserve Banks to
induce as many banks as possible to apply and qualify for War Loan Deptsit
Accounts* The results so far have been gratifying, and a large number of
banks, even though they may have felt that the war loan accounts should
not be subject to deposit insurance assessments or to reserve require-?
ments, have applied and qualified. There are still many thousands of
banks which have not yet come in, and it is clear that the requirements
df existing law, which this bill would suspend f<?r the duration, are a

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

•

3

-

real deterrent in many instances. Not only is a more widespread setting
up of this convenient and necessary mechanism thus impeded, but banks
that have war loan accounts are discouraged from utilizing them as fully
as would be the case if these statutory requirements were suspended.
Neither requirement existed when war loan accounts were originally authorized by Congress in the last war* We had no deposit insurance at that
time and war loan accounts were not subject to reserve requirements be*fore 1935.
I hope that this measure will be promptly enacted so that the
mechanism, which I have tried to outline very simply, may be as widely
set up and as generally utilized as possible to facilitate the large financing operations which are ahead of us as long as the heavy requirements of the war situation continue•

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

