X-9367

BOARD

0 F

G 0 V E R N 0 R S
0 F

F E D E R A L

THE

R E S E R V E

S Y S T E M

FOR THE PRESS
IMMEDIATE RELEASE

NOVEMBER 22. 1955.

Statement by Chairman Eccles on inflation and reserves.

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

X-9367

There appears to be widespread misunderstanding of the situation
now existing with respect to inflationary possibilities, as well as a
misconception of my own attitude with regard to inflation.

I sought

to emphasize in my speech before the American Bankers Association that
it was the duty of the Government to intervene in order to counteract
as far as possible the twin evils of inflation and deflation.

The

v/ord inflation is used by some people to mean any expansion of credit,
or any rapid advance in prices. In order to make it clear what I have
in mind when I speak of inflation as a phenomenon that needs to be controlled, I define inflation as a condition brought about when the means
of payment in the hands of those who will spend them increases faster
than goods can be produced.

In other words, the volume of money must

be related to the volume of actual end potential production of real
wealth.
I asked the question:

"How is it possible to have inflation when

men are idle and plants arc- idle?"
"There can be speculative excesses when surplus funds bid up
stocks or real estate, but inflation in the generally accepted sense
can only come about by increasing the means of pcyment in the hands
of people who are willing to spend faster than we can increase production. We are e
. long way from such a period of inflation."
Considerable confusion seems to exist in some quarters, as reflected in some of the newspapers, about the dangers of "inflation"
at present.

But it is evident that what is meant in most cases is

not inflation in the sense I have indicated, but a stock market "inflation".
In other words, there seems to be concern about r
. repetition of the stock
Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

-2-

X-9367

market excesses of 1929 and a lack of understanding of the Federal Reserve
System's power to deal with the situation.

I wish so far as possible to

clarify the picture in order to correct the notion that the Federal Reserve
System could, by action at this time, reach the stock market situation, and
secondly, the totally mistaken idea that the Chairman, or for that matter,
the other officials of the Federal Reserve System, are indifferent to or disinclined to do whatever is within their power to prevent the development of
an unsound condition.
Anyone who will take the trouble to consult the Reserve System1s reports
on the condition of member banks will see at once that the total of security
loans by banks both to customers other than brokers and to brokers have shown
no growth since the middle of March, when the present rise in security prices
began.

In fact, the figures shov; something of a decline between March 13 and

November 13, as is indicated by the following table:
LOANS ON SECURITIES BY REPORTING
MEMBER B A M S IN 101 LEADING CITIES
(in millions of dollars)
March 13
1935
Total loans on
To brokers and
Total
In New York
Outside Nev„
To customers*

November 13
1935

Change

City
York City

3,239

3,052

- 187

1,031

securities*
dealers:

854
177

974
815
159

2,208

2,078

- 57
- 39
- 18
- 130

STOCK PRICES
(1926^= 100)
421 stocks

63.1
^Exclusive of loans to banks

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

93.3

+
(+

30.2
48%)

X-9367
- 3 The rise in security prices has not been financed by bank credit.
The securities are being bought mostly for cash out of the abundant investment funds in the hands of corporations and individuals and out of
funds sent to this country by foreigners who wish to invest here because
they believe that this is the safest and most profitable use for their
money,
I wish to emphasize two points as strongly as I can: First, I think
that there is an element of safety and of strength in the fact that the
security purchases are being financed out of cash without increased use
of bank credit. I am doubtful whether a run-away stock market situation
can proceed very far without being reflected in an increased demand for borrowed funds*
In this connection I wish also to point out that the amount of money
going into the stock market is not, as some have contended, depriving the
capital market of adequate funds and thus retarding recovery.

That ample

funds are available in the capital markets is evidenced by the fact that offerings of long term securities and mortgages are being absorbed at yields
which have been steadily declining.
The second point which I wish to emphasize even more strongly is that
those who are suggesting that the Federal Reserve System should do something
about stock market conditions at present are under the mistaken impression
that the System Can intervene in the market at any time. As a matter of fact,
the System has no authority whatsoever to curb buying of securities by
individuals or corporations, v/hether foreign or domestic.

Its only authority

in this matter is over margin requirements, which apply only when transactions

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

- 4 -

X-9567

are on credit, as is not the case to any extent at the present time, The
only power the System has is to control the speculative use of bank credit.
There is no speculative use of bank credit in the present situation.
Therefore, I should like to nail once and for all, if possible, the
idea that the Federal Reserve System is neglecting at this time to exercise its power over stock market speculation. There is no truth in this
idea.
As for the general business and credit situation and the volume of
member bank reserves - it is clear that there is no excessive expansion
in any field at this time. There is no evidence of accumulation of inventories, or of frantic bidding for a limited amount of goods, or of an expansion of bank credit, save through the purchase of Government securities.
The turnover of deposits is still low.
The general credit situation as well as developments in the stock
market require close and careful study as to the appropriate time for and
method of action.

This close study is being given by the System, including

not only the Board of Governors itself, but the Open Market Committee and
the Advisory Council as well.

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

