
 IN A certain FAMILY there was an arrant fool. Not a day passed on which they did not receive complaints about him; every day he would either insult someone or injure someone. The fool's mother pitied him and looked after him as if he were a little child; whenever the fool made ready to 
 
 go somewhere, she would explain to him for half an hour what he should do and how he should do it. One day the fool went by the threshing barn and saw the peasants threshing peas, and cried to them: "May you thresh for three days and get three peas threshed!" Because he said this the peasants belabored him with their flails. The fool came back to his mother and cried: "Mother, mother, they have beaten up a fellow!" "Was it you, my child?" "Yes." "Why?" "Because I went by Dormidoshkin's barn and his family were threshing peas there." "And then, my child?" "And I said to them: 'May you thresh for three days and get three peas threshed.' That's why they beat me up." "Oh, my child, you should have said: 'May you have to do this forever and ever.' " 
 The fool was overjoyed. The next day he went to walk in the village and met some people carrying a coffin with a dead man in it. Remembering his mother's words, he roared in a loud voice: "May you have to carry this forever and ever!" Again he was soundly thrashed. The fool returned to his mother and told her why he had been beaten up. "Ah, my child," she said, "you should have said: 'May he rest in peace eternal.' " These words sank deep into the fool's mind. 
 Next day he happened again to walk in the village and met a gay wedding procession. The fool cleared his throat and as soon as he came up to the procession, he cried: "May you rest in peace eternal!" The drunken peasants jumped down from the cart and beat him up cruelly. The fool went home and cried: "0 my dear mother, they've beaten me up terribly." "What for, my child?" The fool told her. His mother said: "My child, you should have danced and played for them." "Thank you, mother," he said. He went to the village once more and took his reed pipe with him. 
 At the end of the village a corn loft was on fire. The fool ran there as fast as he could; he stopped in front of the corn loft and began to dance and to play on his reed pipe. Again he was thrashed. Again he came in tears to his mother and told her why he had been beaten up. His mother said: "You should have taken some water and helped them to quench the fire." Three days later, when the fool's sides were healed, he went 
 
 again to walk in the village. He saw a peasant singeing a pig. The fool snatched a pail of water from a woman who was going by with her cowlstaff, ran to the peasant, and poured water over the fire. Again he was soundly thrashed. Again he returned to his mother and told her why he had been beaten up. Then his mother swore never again to let him go to the village, and until this day he has never gone farther than his own back yard. 

