
 While cleaning manure out of a shed, a peasant found some oats. He went to his wife, who was making a fire in the stove, and said: "Now wife, get busy! Rake up the fire, pour this grain into the stove; then dig it out, pound it and grind it, make a pudding, and put it into dishes; I shall go to the king, bring him a dish of pudding, and he may reward me with something." 
 He came to the king, bringing him a dish of pudding; the 
 
 king rewarded him with a golden heath hen. He started homeward; passing by a field, he saw herdsmen grazing a drove of horses. The herdsmen asked him: "Little peasant, where have you been?" "I have been to see the king and I brought him a dish of pudding." "And what did the king give you?" "A golden heath hen." "Exchange your heath hen for a horse." The peasant made the exchange, mounted the horse, and rode on. He came near a herd of cows. The cowherd said: "Little peasant, where have you been?" "I have been to see the king and I brought him a dish of pudding." "And what did the king give you?" "A golden heath hen." "Where is your golden heath hen?" "I exchanged it for a horse." "Exchange your horse for a cow." 
 He made the exchange and led off the cow by her horns. Then he came up to a flock of sheep. The shepherd said: "Little peasant, where have you been?" "I have been to see the king and I brought him a dish of pudding." "And what did the king give you?" "A golden heath hen." "Where is your golden heath hen?" "I exchanged it for a horse." "Where is your horse?" "I exchanged it for a cow." "Exchange the cow for a sheep." 
 The peasant made the exchange and drove off the sheep. He came up to a herd of pigs. The swineherd said: "Little peasant, where have you been?" "I have been to see the king and I brought him a dish of pudding." "And what did the king give you?" "A golden heath hen." "Where is your golden heath hen?" "I exchanged it for a horse." "Where is your horse?" "I exchanged it for a cow." "Where is the cow?" "I exchanged it for a sheep." "Exchange the sheep for a pig." 
 He made the exchange and drove off the pig. Then he came up to a flock of geese. The gooseherd said: "Little peasant, where have you been?" "I have been to see the king and I brought him a dish of pudding." "And what did the king give you?" "A golden heath hen." "Where is your golden heath hen?" "I exchanged it for a horse." "Where is your horse?" "I exchanged it for a cow." "Where is the cow?" "I exchanged it for a sheep." "Where is the sheep?" "I exchanged it for a pig." "Exchange the pig for a goose." 
 He made the exchange and carried away the goose. Then he 
 
 came up to a flock of ducks. The shepherd asked him: "Little peasant, where have you been?" "I have been to see the king and I brought him a dish of pudding." "And what did the king give you?" "A golden heath hen." "Where is your golden heath hen?" "I exchanged it for a horse." "Where is your horse?" "I exchanged it for a cow." "Where is the cow?" "I exchanged it for a sheep." "Where is the sheep?" "I exchanged it for a pig." "Where is the pig?" "I exchanged it for a goose." "Exchange the goose for a duck." 
 He made the exchange and carried away the duck. Then he came up to some children playing ball with a stick. The children asked him: "Little peasant, where have you been?" "I have been to see the king and I brought him a dish of pudding." "And what did the king give you?" "A golden heath hen." "Where is your golden heath hen?" "I exchanged it for a horse." "Where is your horse?" "I exchanged it for a cow." "Where is the cow?" "I exchanged it for a sheep." "Where is the sheep?" "I exchanged it for a pig." "Where is the pig?" "I exchanged it for a goose." "Where is your goose?" "I exchanged it for a duck." "Exchange the duck for a stick." 
 He made the exchange and walked on; he came home, put his stick near the gate, and entered the house. His wife began to question him, and he told her everything up until the moment when he acquired the stick. "Where is the stick?" asked his wife. "Near the gate." She went out, took the stick, and began to belabor him with it, saying: "Don't exchange things! Don't exchange things, you old dotard! You should at least have brought the duck home!" 
 
