
 A bladder, a blade of straw, and a shoe went to chop wood in the forest. They came to a river and did not know how to cross it. The shoe said to the bladder: "Bladder, let us swim across it on you." The bladder said: "No, shoe, let the straw blade instead stretch itself from shore to shore, and we will walk over it." The blade of straw stretched itself across the water; the shoe walked on it and the straw broke. The shoe fell into the water, and the bladder laughed and laughed until it burst. 
 THE THIEF 
 Once there lived an old man and his wife and they had a son called Ivan. They fed him until he grew up to be a big boy and then said: "Well, little son, we have fed you up until now, henceforth feed us till the end of our days." Ivan answered them: "Since you fed me till I grew big, now feed me till I get a mustache." They fed him till he had a mustache, and said: "Well, little son, we fed you till you had a mustache, now feed us till the end of our days." "Eh, father and mother," the son answered, "since you fed me till I have a mustache, feed me now till I have a beard." There was nothing to be done; the old parents fed him till he had a beard, and then said: "Well, little son, we fed you till you had a beard, now feed us till the end of our days." "Since you fed me till I had a beard, feed me now till the end of my days," said the son. The old man could not bear it any longer and went to the barin to complain about his son. 
 
 The lord summoned Ivan and said: "You idler, why don't you support your father and mother?" "How can I support them?" answered Ivan. "Or do you give me leave to steal? I have never learned to work, and now it is too late for me to learn." "Do as you please," said the barin; "steal if you must, but support your parents and let there be no more complaints against you!" At that moment a servant came in announcing that the barin's bath was ready, and the barin went to steam himself. It was getting dark; the barin washed himself, returned, and said: "Hey, is someone there? Give me my slippers!" Ivan, who was still there, handed him the slippers, took the barin's boots, and went home with them. "Here, father," he said, "take off your shoes of linden bark, put on the barin's boots instead." 
 Next morning the barin discovered that his boots were gone. He sent for Ivan and asked him: "Did you carry off my boots?" "I don't know anything, but it's my work." "Ah, you scoundrel, you cheat! How dare you steal?" "But didn't you tell me yourself that I must support my father and mother, even if I have to steal? I would not disobey your orders, master." "In that case," said the barin, "listen to this order. Steal my black ox from the plow; if you do steal him, I'll give you a hundred rubles; if you do not, I'll give you a hundred lashes with the whip." "At your orders, barin," said Ivan. 
 He went straightway to the village, stole a cock somewhere, plucked his feathers, and hastened to the field. He sneaked up to the edge of the furrow, lifted a clump of earth, put the cock under it, and hid behind the bushes. When the plowmen began to trace a new furrow, they caught that clump of earth and shoved it to one side; the plucked cock jumped out and rushed along the mounds and ruts. "Look at the strange beast that we dug out of the earth!" cried the plowmen, and ran after the cock. When Ivan saw that they were running like scalded creatures, he went to the plow, cut off the tail of one ox, stuck it into the mouth of the second, unharnessed the third ox, and led him home. 
 The plowmen chased the cock for a long time, but failed to catch him and went back. They discovered that the black ox 
 
 had gone and that the speckled one had lost its tail. "Well, brothers," one of them said, "while we ran after the strange animal, one ox ate the black one whole and bit off the tail of the speckled one." They went to the barin to confess their dereliction. "Forgive us, little father, one ox ate another." "Ah, you brainless fools," the barin shouted at them, "who ever saw an ox eating another ox? Summon Ivan!" When Ivan came he asked: "Did you steal the ox?" "I did, barin." "What have you done with him?" "I have slaughtered him; sold the hide at the bazaar, and with the flesh I will feed my parents." "You're a clever fellow," said the barin. "Here is a hundred rubles for you. But now steal my favorite stallion, which stands behind three doors and six locks. If you lead him away, I'll pay you two hundred rubles; if you do not, I'll give you two hundred lashes with the whip." "Very well, barin, I'll steal him." 
 Late at night Ivan got into the barin's house. There was not a living soul in the entrance hall; he noticed the barin's clothes hanging on the peg, took the overcoat and cap, put them on himself, went out on the porch, and cried to the stableboys in a loud voice: "Hey, boys, saddle my favorite stallion at once and lead him up here!" The stableboys took him for the barin, ran to the stable, unlocked the six locks, opened the three doors, and in a trice the stallion was saddled and brought up to the porch. The thief mounted him, lashed him with a riding crop, and was gone. 
 Next day the barin asked: "Well, how is my favorite stallion?" And he learned that the horse had been stolen the night before. He again had to send for Ivan. "Did you steal the stallion?" the barin asked. "I did, barin." "Where is he?" "I've sold him to horse dealers." "You're lucky that I myself ordered you to steal him! Take your two hundred rubles. But now steal the teacher of the dissenting church." "And what, barin, do you offer me for that job?" "Will three hundred rubles be enough?" "Yes, I'll steal him for that sum." "And if you fail?" "Then, barin, do with me what you please." 
 The barin summoned the teacher and said to him: "Be on your guard; pray all night, do not dare to sleep! Ivan the thief has boasted that he will kidnap you." The saintly old man took 
 
 fright. He did not feel like sleeping at all; he sat in his cell and chanted prayers. On the stroke of midnight Ivan the thief, carrying a burlap sack, knocked at the window. "Who are you, man?" the teacher asked. "I am an angel from heaven, sent to bring you to paradise alive; crawl into this sack." The teacher foolishly crawled into the sack; the thief tied him up, slung him over his shoulders, and carried him to the church steeple. He dragged and dragged him. "Is it still far?" asked the teacher. "Wait and see," said Ivan. "In the beginning the road is long but smooth, in the end it is short but bumpy." 
 Ivan dragged the sack and let it roll down the stairs; the teacher was badly bumped, he counted every step. "Oh," he said, "the angel spoke the truth: the first part of the way is long but smooth, and the last part is short but bumpy. I didn't suffer that much even on earth." "Be patient, you will be saved," answered Ivan. He lifted the sack, hung it on the fence near the gate, put two birch twigs as thick as a finger near by, and wrote on the gate: "Whoever goes by and fails to strike this bag three times, let him be cursed and anathematized." Thus everyone who went by struck the bag three times. The barin passed near the church gate and asked: "What is in that sack?" And he ordered it to be taken down and untied. The teacher of the dissenting church crawled out of it. "How did you get here?" asked the barin. "I told you to be on your guard! I am not sorry that you have been beaten with rods, but I am sorry that because of you I will lose three hundred rubles." 
 THE VAMPIRE 
 IN A certain kingdom in a certain land there lived an old man and his wife. They had a daughter named Marusia. In their village it was customary to celebrate the holiday of St. Andrew: the girls would assemble in one house, bake cream puffs, and make merry for a whole week or more. Upon one 
 
 
 
 such occasion the girls gathered together and baked and cooked whatever was needed; at nightfall the young men came with pipes and wine, and there was dancing and merriment. All the girls danced well, but Marusia best of all. After some time a handsome fellow entered the house, a man with a fine complexion, dressed neatly and richly. "Good evening, lovely maidens," he said. "Good evening, young man," they said. "You're welcome to join us." Straightway he drew a purse full of gold from his pocket, sent for wine, nuts, and gingerbread, and began to treat all the girls and youths; he gave enough to all. Then he danced so beautifully that it was a pleasure to look at him. Best of all he liked Marusia, and he did not leave her a minute. 
 The time came to go home. The young man said: "Marusia, come and walk a few steps with me." So she went out and walked with him a little. He said: "Marusia, my darling, do you want me to marry you?" "If you want to take me as your wife, I will marry you gladly. But whence are you?" "From such and such a place; I am a merchant's clerk." They said farewell, and each went his way. When Marusia came home, her mother asked her: "Did you have a good time, little daughter?" "Very good, mother. And I want to tell you a piece of good news: there was a fine young man there, handsome, with 
 
 plenty of money, who promised to take me to wife." "Listen to me, Marusia," the mother said. "Tomorrow when you go to the girls, take a ball of thread. When you say farewell to him, loop the thread around a button on his clothes and quietly loosen the ball; then you will learn from this thread where he lives." 
 Next day Marusia went to the party and took along a ball of thread. The young man came again. "Good evening, Marusia," he said. "Good evening," she replied. The merrymaking and dancing began; the young man clung to Marusia even more ardently than before, he did not leave her for an instant. When the time came to go home, the guest said: "Marusia, come walk a little way with me." She went out into the street, began to take farewell of him, and quietly slipped a loop of thread around a button of his clothes. He went his way and she stood there loosening the ball; when it was all unrolled, she ran to find out where her promised groom lived. At first the thread followed the road, then it stretched across fences and ditches and led Marusia straight to the main gate of the church. Marusia tried the gate, but it was closed; she went around the church, found a ladder, put it under the window, and climbed up to see what was going on inside. She peered inside: her promised groom stood near a coffin and was eating a corpse, for a dead man was then laid out in the church. She wanted to jump quietly down from the ladder, but in her fright she stumbled and made a noise. She ran home in terror, fancying that she was pursued, and when she arrived at home she was half dead. 
 Next morning her mother asked her: "Well, Marusia, did you see that young man?" "I did, mother," she answered, but she did not tell her mother all that she had seen. When evening came, Marusia sat thoughtful, wondering whether or not to go to the party. "Go," said her mother. "Make merry while you're young." She went to the party and the evil stranger was there. Again there were games, merriment and dancing; the girls did not suspect anything. At the end of the evening, the evil spirit said: "Marusia, will you walk a few steps with me?" She refused to go, she was afraid. All the girls pressed her: "What is the matter with you? Are you timid? Go and say farewell to the fine young man." She had no choice but to go, 
 
 putting her hope in God. As soon as they were in the street, the young man asked her: "Were you in the church last night?" "No." "Did you see what I was doing there?" "No." "Well, tomorrow your father will die." Having said this, he vanished. 
 Marusia returned home sad and listless; next morning when she awoke, her father was dead. They wept over him and put him in a coffin; at night the mother went to the priest and Marusia remained at home. She felt frightened and decided to join her friends. When she came, she found the evil one there. "Good evening, Marusia, why are you so sad?" the girls asked her. "How can I be merry? My father has died." "Ah, poor girl!" Everyone grieved with her; so did the vampire, just as though it were not his work. The guests began to leave. The evil youth said: "Marusia, come walk a few steps with me." She refused. The other girls pressed her, saying: "What are you, a little girl or a woman? Why are you afraid? Walk with him!" She went out with him. In the street he said: "Tell me, Marusia, were you in the church?" "No." "Did you see what I was doing?" "No." "Well, tomorrow your mother will die." Having said this, he vanished. 
 Marusia went home even sadder than before; next morning when she awoke, her mother lay dead. All day she wept; then the sun set, it began to grow dark, and she was afraid to stay alone, so she went to join her friends. "Good evening! What is the matter with you? You look quite pale!" they said. "How can I be merry? Yesterday my father died, and today my mother," Marusia said. "Poor girl, unfortunate girl!" Everyone sympathized with her. The time came to go home. "Marusia, come walk a few steps with me," said the evil spirit. She went out with him. "Tell me," he asked, "were you in the church?" "No." "Did you see what I was doing?" "No." "Well, before tomorrow night you yourself will die." Marusia spent the night with her friends; in the morning she got up and wondered what to do. She recalled that she had a grandmother, who was very, very old and had been blind for many years. She decided to go to her grandmother and ask her advice. 
 She went to her grandmother. "Good day, grandmother," she said. "Good day, little granddaughter! How does God favor 
 
 you? How are your father and mother?" "They are dead, grandmother." And she recounted everything that had happened to her. The old woman listened to her and said: "Ah, you poor girl! Go quickly to the priest, and ask him to see that when you die a hole is dug under the door sill, and that you are carried from your house not through the door but through that hole; and also ask him to bury you at the crossroads." Marusia went to the priest and with tears in her eyes begged him to do everything that her grandmother had told her to ask for. She returned home, bought a coffin, laid herself in it, and died at once. The priest was called; he first buried Marusia's father and mother, and then buried her. She was carried out through the hole under the door and buried at a spot where two roads met. 
 Shortly afterward the son of a boyar happened to drive by Marusia's grave; and he beheld a wondrous little flower growing on that grave, a flower such as he had never seen. The barin said to his servant: "Go and dig up that flower with its root; we will take it home, put it in a pot, and let it blossom in our house." They dug up the flower, took it home, planted it in a glazed pot, and put it on the window sill. The flower began to grow and blossom gloriously. One night the servant somehow could not sleep. He looked out of the window and saw a miracle: the flower suddenly began to sway, fell to the ground, and turned into a lovely maiden. The flower was pretty, but the maiden still prettier. She went through the rooms, got herself food and wine, ate and drank, struck the floor, turned again into a flower, ascended to the window, and sat on the branch. 
 Next day the servant told the barin about the miracle that he had seen during the night. "Ah, brother, why did you not rouse me? Tonight we will both keep watch." At the stroke of twelve the flower began to stir: it flew from place to place, then it fell to the floor and a lovely maiden appeared. She got herself food and drink and sat down to gup. The barin ran to her, took her by her white hands and led her into his room; he could not feast his eyes enough upon her beauty. In the morning he said to his father and mother: "Give me leave to marry, I have found a bride for myself." The parents gave him leave. Marusia said: "I will marry you only on condition that for four years we do not go to church." "Agreed," he said. 
 They wedded, lived together one year, then a second, and had a son. One day visitors came to them; they made merry, drank, and began to boast of their wives. One said that his wife was good; the other said that his was better. "Well, say what you will," said the host, "my wife is better than anyone's." "She is good, but she is an infidel," answered the guests. "Why do you say so?" "She never goes to church." The husband felt insulted by these words; the following Sunday he ordered his wife to get dressed to go to mass. "Don't contradict me! Get ready without delay!" he commanded. They made ready and went to church; the husband went in and saw nothing, but she saw the vampire sitting on the window sill. "Aha, so you are here?" he said. "Do you remember what happened long ago? Were you in the church last night?" "No." "Did you see what I was doing there?" "No." "Well, tomorrow both your husband and your son will die." 
 Marusia rushed straight from the church to her grandmother. The old woman gave her one phial of holy water and another of the water of life, and instructed her as to what she was to do. Next day Marusia's husband and her son died. The vampire flew to her and asked: "Tell me, were you in the church?" "I was." "And did you see what I was doing?" "You were devouring a corpse." When she had said this she sprinkled him with holy water and he turned into dust. Then she sprinkled her husband and her son with the water of life and they breathed again at once. From that time on they never knew distress nor separation, and they all lived together long and happily. 





