 A fly built a castle, a tall and mighty castle. There came to the castle the Crawling Louse. "Who, who's in the castle? Who, who's in your house?" said the Crawling Louse. "I, I, the Languishing Fly. And who art thou?" "I'm the Crawling Louse." 
 Then came to the castle the Leaping Flea. "Who, who's in the castle?" said the Leaping Flea. "I, I, the Languishing Fly, and I, the Crawling Louse. And who art thou?" "I'm the Leaping Flea." 
 Then came to the castle the Mischievous Mosquito. "Who, who's in the castle?" said the Mischievous Mosquito. "I, I, the Languishing Fly, and I, the Crawling Louse, and I, the Leaping Flea. And who art thou?" "I'm the Mischievous Mosquito." 
 Then came to the castle the Murmuring Mouse. "Who, who's in the castle?" said the Murmuring Mouse. "I, I, the Languishing Fly, and I, the Crawling Louse, and I, the Leaping Flea, and I, the Mischievous Mosquito. And who art thou?" "I'm the Murmuring Mouse." 
 Then came to the castle the Wriggly Lizard. "Who, who's in the castle?" said the Wriggly Lizard. "I, I the Languishing Fly, and I, the Crawling Louse, and I, the Leaping Flea, and I, the Mischievous Mosquito, and I, the Murmuring Mouse. And who art thou?" "I'm the Wriggly Lizard." 
 Then came to the castle Patricia Fox. "Who, who's in the castle?" said Patricia Fox. "I, I, the Languishing Fly, and I, the Crawling Louse, and I, the Leaping Flea, and I, the Mischievous Mosquito, and I, the Murmuring Mouse, and I, the Wriggly Lizard. And who art thou?" "I'm Patricia Fox." 
 Then came to the castle Highjump the Hare. "Who, who's in the castle?" said Highjump the Hare. "I, I, the Languishing Fly, and I, the Crawling Louse, and I, the Leaping Flea, and I, the Mischievous Mosquito, and I, the Murmuring Mouse, and I, the Wriggly Lizard, and I, Patricia Fox. And who art thou?" "I'm Highjump the Hare." 
 
 Then came to the castle Wolf Graytail. "Who, who's in the castle?" said Wolf Graytail. "I, I, the Languishing Fly, and I, the Crawling Louse, and I, the Leaping Flea, and I, the Mischievous Mosquito, and I, the Murmuring Mouse, and I, the Wriggly Lizard, and I, Patricia Fox, and I, Highjump the Hare. And who art thou?" "I'm Wolf Graytail." 
 Then came to the castle Bear Thicklegs. "Who, who's in the castle?" said Bear Thicklegs. "I, I, the Languishing Fly, and I, the Crawling Louse, and I, the Leaping Flea, and I, the Mischievous Mosquito, and I, the Murmuring Mouse, and I, the Wriggly Lizard, and I, Patricia Fox, and I, Highjump the Hare, and I, Wolf Graytail. And who art thou?" 
 "I'm Rumbling Thunder! I'll tumble you under! I'm Bear Thicklegs!" And he laid his thick paw on the castle, and smashed it! 
 THE TURNIP 
 Grandfather planted a turnip. The time came to pick it. He took hold of it and pulled and pulled, but he couldn't pull it out. Grandfather called grandmother; grandmother pulled grandfather, and grandfather pulled the turnip. They pulled and pulled, but they couldn't pull it out. Then their granddaughter came; she pulled grandma, grandma pulled grandpa, grandpa pulled the turnip; they pulled and they pulled, but they couldn't pull it out. Then the puppy came; he pulled the granddaughter, she pulled grandma, grandma pulled grandpa, grandpa pulled the turnip; they pulled and they pulled, but they couldn't pull it out. Then a beetle came; the beetle pulled the puppy, the puppy pulled the granddaughter, she pulled grandma, grandma pulled grandpa, grandpa pulled the turnip; they pulled and they pulled, but they couldn't pull it out. Then came a second beetle. 
 
 The second beetle pulled the first beetle, the first beetle pulled the puppy, the puppy pulled the granddaughter, she pulled grandma, grandma pulled grandpa, grandpa pulled the turnip; they pulled and they pulled, but they couldn't pull it out. (Repeated for a third beetle, and a fourth.) Then the fifth beetle came. He pulled the fourth beetle, the fourth beetle pulled the third, the third pulled the second, the second pulled the first, the first beetle pulled the puppy, the puppy pulled the granddaughter, she pulled grandma, grandma pulled grandpa, grandpa pulled the turnip; they pulled and they pulled, and they pulled out the turnip. 
 THE HEN 
 In grandmother's yard Lived a speckled hen. She laid an egg one day; The egg rolled down From shelf to shelf And in the end it found itself In a little keg of aspen wood Away in a corner under a bench. A mouse ran by too near the keg, Wiggled his tail, and broke the egg! 
 At this great catastrophe An old cripple began to cry, An ugly crone let out a sigh, A startled chicken rose to fly; The gateposts shrieked, All doors creaked, The swilltub leaked; The priest's daughter, 
 
 Carrying water, Broke her buckets. 
 All in a dither 
 She came to her mother 
 And said: 
 "Mother, mother, have you heard the news? 
 In grandmother's yard 
 Lived a speckled hen. 
 She laid an egg today; 
 The egg rolled down 
 From shelf to shelf 
 And in the end it found itself 
 In a little keg of aspen wood 
 Away in a corner under a bench. 
 A mouse ran by too near the keg, 
 Wiggled his tail, and broke the egg! 
 "At this great catastrophe An old cripple began to cry, An ugly crone let out a sigh, A startled chicken rose to fly; The gateposts shrieked, All doors creaked, The swilltub leaked; And I, your daughter, Carrying water, Broke my buckets." 
 The wife of the priest 
 Dropped her yeast 
 And her precious dough fell to the floor. 
 She headed straight 
 Through the churchyard gate 
 And said: 
 "Husband, husband, have you heard the news? In grandmother's yard 
 
 Lives a speckled hen. 
 She laid an egg today; 
 The egg rolled down 
 From shelf to shelf 
 And in the end it found itself 
 In a little keg of aspen wood 
 Away in a corner under a bench. 
 A mouse ran by too near the keg, 
 Wiggled his tail, and broke the egg! 
 "At this great catastrophe: 
 An old cripple began to cry, 
 An ugly crone let out a sigh, 
 A startled chicken rose to fly; 
 The gateposts shrieked, 
 All doors creaked, 
 The swilltub leaked; 
 Our dear daughter, 
 Carrying water, 
 Broke her buckets; 
 And I, your wife, 
 Dropped my dough to the floor." 
 The holy father with a terrible look Tore the pages out of his book And scattered them on the floor. 
