
 THERE WAS ONCE a merchant who had a son. One day the merchant sent his son to the city to buy merchandise and instructed him: "Mind you, little son, be careful and don't make friends with redheads." The merchant's son set out on his way. It was a cold day; he felt chilly and stopped at an alehouse to warm himself. When he entered he found a redheaded servant pouring out liquor. "Pour me a glass of good liquor," said the merchant's son to him. He drank it and found it very much to his taste. "That's fine liquor," he said, "it's worth a hundred rubles. Pour me another glass." He drank the second glass and it seemed even better. "Well, brother," he said, "this glass is worth two hundred rubles." The man behind the counter was quick-witted: he wrote on the wall the sums mentioned by the merchant's son. 
 When the time came to pay the bill, the merchant's son said: "How much do I owe you?" "Three hundred rubles." "Are you out of your mind to charge me such a price?" "You set the price yourself, and now you are trying to go back on your word! No, brother, you can't wriggle out of it; unless you pay, I will not let you go." There was nothing to be done. The merchant's son paid three hundred rubles, went on his way, and thought to himself: "I'll remember now not to make friends with redheads! My father spoke the truth, and one should always listen to one's parents." 
 At that very moment he met a redheaded peasant driving a cart. When the merchant's son saw him, he jumped out of his carriage and lay flat in the snow, trembling with fear. "What's the matter with him?" the peasant wondered. He went over to the merchant's son and tried to raise him to his feet: "Get up, brother!" he said. "Let me alone! One redhead cheated me, you'll cheat me too." "Don't be foolish, brother! There are redheads of all kinds; some are cheats, some are honest. But who cheated you?" "So-and-so, the redheaded man who serves liquor in the neighboring village." "Come back with me, I'll take care of him." 
 
 They returned to the alehouse. The peasant cast a glance around him and noticed that a shoulder of mutton was hanging from the main beam; he went to the servant, asked for a glass of vodka, and at the same time tapped him on his shoulder and said: "How about selling me that shoulder?" "I'll sell it for a ruble." The peasant gave him a ruble, then drew a big knife from his pocket and gave it to the merchant's son, saying: "Now, brother, cut off his shoulder, I'll have it with my vodka." "Are you crazy?" said the servant. "I sold you the shoulder of mutton, not my shoulder." "Don't tell me any such stories, you won't cheat me as you cheated this merchant's son. I'm no fool." The servant began to beg and implore him, bowing almost to the ground. "Very well," said the peasant, "I will forgive you if you will return all the money to the merchant's son." The servant returned the three hundred rubles, and that was what the peasant wanted. "You see," he said to the merchant's son. "There are redheads of all kinds-cheats and honest people. Now go in peace." 
 The merchant's son was glad to go; he got into his carriage, spurred his horses, and said to himself: "Thank God I got away! The redheaded servant is a cheat, but this peasant is an even greater cheat; if I had become friendly with him, he would surely have skinned me alive." 

