A POOR old peasant lived with his wife. They had three sons: two were clever, but the third was Ivan the Fool. Sometimes the elder brothers went hunting and the fool followed them; the two clever brothers caught wild beasts and game birds, but the fool caught rats and mice, magpies and crows. Once the brothers sowed peas in the garden and told Ivan the Fool to guard the plants against crows. Their old mother had to go to the garden; as soon as she came there, Ivan the Fool noticed her and said to himself: "Just wait, I'll catch that thief; he'll remember me!" He stole up to the old woman quietly, raised his stick, and gave her such a blow on the head that she fell asleep forever without so much as a gasp. The fool's father and brothers began to chide, reproach, and abuse him. But he sat on the stove, dug in the soot, and said: "Why the devil did she try to steal? You yourselves put me there to watch." "You fool," said the brothers, "you've made your bed, now lie on it; get down from the stove and dispose of the body." The fool muttered: "I'll do it as well as anyone.'"' 
 
 He took the old woman, dressed her in her Sunday best, put her in the back of a carriage, placed an embroidery frame in her hands, and drove through the village. 
 He met an official driving toward him. "Get over to the side, peasant!" The fool answered: "Get over to the side yourself. I'm carrying the king's embroiderer." "Run over that scoundrel," said the official to his coachman, and as soon as their horses passed each other, the wheels of the two carriages caught, and the fool and the old woman were hurled out to a distance. "Gentlemen, boyars," cried the fool to all the people, "they've killed my mother, the king's embroiderer!" The official saw that the old woman was dead, got frightened, and began to implore the fool: "Take anything you want, little peasant, only don't gather a crowd." The fool did not want to make too much of a fuss, and said: "Give me three hundred rubles and arrange with the priest to bury the dead woman." This ended the matter; the fool took the money, turned back, came home to his father and brothers, and they all began to live happily together. 
