
 A potter was driving along a road when he met a passer-by, who said: "Hire me as your worker." "But do you know how to make pots?" the potter asked him. "I do, very well indeed," the stranger said. They made a bargain, shook hands on it, and drove on together. When they came to the potter's home, the worker said: "Now master, prepare forty carts of clay; tomorrow I shall set to work." The master prepared forty carts of clay, and the worker, who was an evil spirit, said to the potter: "I shall work at night; do not come to my barn." "Why?" "Just don't. If you do come, I warn you, you will get into trouble." Dark night came. On the stroke of twelve, the evil spirit cried out in a loud voice, and a numberless host of imps gathered around him and began to fashion pottery; thunderous pounding, clatter and laughter resounded all over the yard. The master could not restrain himself and went to see what all the noise was about. He came to the barn, looked through a crack, and saw the devils squatting there and molding pots. Only one lame one was not working, but keeping watch; he caught sight of the master, seized a lump of clay, hurled it, and hit the potter straight in the eye. The master 
 
 returned to his house; he had lost one eye, and in the barn there was even more uproarious laughter than before. 
 In the morning the worker said: "Eh, master, go and count the pots, see how many have been made in one night." The master counted: there were forty thousand. "Well," the worker said, "now prepare ten cords of wood for me; tonight I will bake the pots." Exactly at midnight the evil spirit cried out in a loud voice; imps came running to him from every corner; they smashed up all the pots, threw the shards into the oven, and began to bake them. And the master came to the barn and found a little crack and looked in. "Well, all the pots are broken," he thought. Next day the worker called him and said: "Come and see how well I have worked." The master came to look and found that all of the forty thousand pots were whole -one was better than the other. On the third night the evil spirit called the imps together, painted the pots with various colors, and put them all on one cart. 
 They waited till market day and carried the pots to town to sell them, and the evil spirit ordered his imps to run to all the houses, through all the streets, and invite the people to buy the pots. Crowds came to the market, thronged around the potter, and in half an hour bought all his merchandise. The peasant drove home with a bagful of money. "Now," said the evil spirit, "let us share the profits." They shared half-and-half. The devil took his lot, said farewell to the master, and vanished. A week later the peasant went to town with his pots. He stood in the market place a long time, but no one bought from him; all the people passed him by and swore at him in the most abusive language. "We know your pots, you old dotard. They look pretty, but the moment you put water into them they fall to pieces. No, brother, you won't cheat us again." They ceased buying pots from him altogether. Finally the peasant was completely ruined. Out of grief he took to drinking and began to spend all his time lying around in alehouses. 
 
