Once there lived a peasant and his wife and they did not need to work at all; they had a dog that gave them meat and drink. Then came a day when the dog grew old and could not think of feeding the peasant and his wife; in fact, he almost died of hunger himself. "Listen, old man," said the woman. "Take this dog, lead him beyond the village, and chase him away; let him go wherever he wants, we don't need him now. There was a time when he fed us; then it was worth while keeping him." The old man took the dog, led him out of the village, and chased him away. And so the dog walked in the open field and was afraid to go home lest the old man and woman beat him. The dog walked and walked, then sat on the ground and began to howl in a loud voice. A woodpecker flew by and asked: "Why do you howl?" "How can I help howling, woodpecker? When I was young I gave the old man and his wife food and drink; when I grew old, they drove me away. I don't know where to spend my last days." "Come to me, guard my children, and I will feed you," said the woodpecker. The dog consented and ran after the woodpecker. 
 They came to an old oak; in the oak there was a hollow, and in the hollow was the woodpecker's nest. "Sit near the oak," said the woodpecker, "do not let anyone in, and I will fly to find food." The dog sat by the oak and the woodpecker flew off. He flew and flew and saw women walking along the road carrying pots-their husbands' dinner pails. He flew back to the oak and said: "Now, dog, follow me; along the road there are women with pails, carrying dinner to their husbands in the field. You stand behind a bush, and I will plunge into water, roll in sand, and fly low before the women on the road, as though unable to fly higher. They will put their pails on the ground and run after me, trying to catch me. Then you rush to the pails and eat your fill." The dog followed the wood- 
 
 pecker and, just as he had been told to do, stood behind a bush, while the woodpecker rolled in sand and began to flutter before the women on the road. "Look," said the women, "the woodpecker is all wet, let us catch him." They put their pails on the ground and ran after the woodpecker, and he flew farther and farther, led them to one side, rose high, and flew away. Meanwhile the dog had run out from behind the bush, eaten up everything that was in the pots, and gone away. The women came back and found the pails empty; there was nothing they could do, so they took their pails and went home. 
 The woodpecker overtook the dog and asked: "Well, have you eaten your fill?" "Yes," said the dog. "Then let us go home," said the woodpecker. He flew and the dog ran after him; on the way they met a fox. "Catch the fox," said the woodpecker. The dog jumped after the fox and the fox darted off. Just then a peasant happened to drive by with a barrel of tar. The fox shot across the road, straight to the cart, and jumped through the spokes of the wheel; the dog jumped after her, but got stuck in the wheel and gave up the ghost. "Ah, peasant," said the woodpecker, "since you have run over my dog, I will cause you great trouble." He sat on the cart and began to bore a hole in the barrel, pecking at its bottom. When the peasant drove him away from the barrel, he flew to the horse, sat between his ears, and bored a hole in his head. When the peasant drove him away from the horse, he returned to the barrel, pierced a hole in it, and let out all the tar. Then he said: "That is not all!" And again he began to bore a hole in the horse's head. The peasant took a big log, sat in his cart, waited for an opportune moment, and struck with all his strength; only he did not hit the woodpecker, he hit the horse on the head and killed him. The woodpecker flew to the peasant's house and went in through the window. The peasant's wife was busy making a fire in the stove and her little child was sitting on the bench; the woodpecker sat on the child's head and began to peck at it. The woman tried to drive him away, but could not; the vicious woodpecker kept pecking and pecking. Finally the peasant woman grabbed a stick and struck: she did not hit the woodpecker, but hurt her own child. 
 





