
 IN A certain kingdom in a certain land there lived a wealthy merchant who had a son by the name of Ivan. The merchant loaded his ships, left his house and shops in charge of his wife and son, and set out on a voyage to distant parts. He sailed the seas for one month, two months, and three 
 
 months, cast anchor in foreign lands, bought their merchandise, and sold his own at a good price. During that time not a little misfortune befell Ivan, the merchant's son; for all the other merchants and burghers became angry at him, saying: "Why is he so lucky? He has robbed us of all our customers!" They put their heads together, wrote a petition stating that such and such a merchant's son was a thief and drunkard unworthy of belonging to their guild, and sentenced him to become a soldier. The poor young man had his head shaven and was sent to the regiment. 
 Ivan served and suffered not just one year, but ten; then he wanted to visit his native town, asked for a six months' furlough, and set out on his way. His father and mother were overjoyed at his return; he stayed with them through the appointed time, and then had to go back. His father led him to deep cellars filled with gold and silver and said to him: "My beloved son, take as much money as your heart desires." Ivan, the merchant's son, stuffed his pockets, received solemn blessings from his parents, said farewell to his family, and rode off to his regiment, for his father had bought him a magnificent horse. The separation filled the goodly youth with great sadness and sorrow. On his way he saw an alehouse, and stopped at it to drown his sorrow in wine; he drank one pint and it seemed not enough; he drank another pint, got drunk, and fell fast asleep. 
 Out of nowhere came dissolute drunkards, who took all his money, down to the last penny. Ivan awoke to discover that he had been robbed clean; he grieved, but continued on his way. Dark night overtook him in a deserted place; he rode and rode, till he saw an inn. Near the inn was a post, and on the post was an inscription saying that whoever should spend the night in the inn must pay a hundred rubles. What could Ivan do? After all, he did not want to die of hunger, so he knocked at the gate. A boy ran out, led him to a room, and his horse to the stable. Ivan was given everything his heart desired; he ate and drank his fill, then looked thoughtful. "Mr. Soldier," said the host, "why are you so sad? Is it because you have no money to pay me with?" "It isn't that, host! But while I am sated, my faithful 
 
 horse is hungry." "No, Mr. Soldier! You can see for yourself that he has plenty of hay and oats." "I know that, but our horses have this habit: if I am beside him he will eat, but without me he will not even touch his feed." The innkeeper ran to the stable, looked in, and so it was: the horse stood there, his head hanging low, and he did not even glance at the oats. "What an intelligent horse!" thought the innkeeper. "He is attached to his master." And he ordered the soldier's bed to be prepared in the stable. Ivan went to sleep there, and on the stroke of midnight, when everything was quiet in the house, he saddled his horse and galloped off. 
 Next day at sunset he stopped at an inn where the charge was two hundred rubles a night; here too he succeeded in cheating his host. The third day he came to an inn where lodging was even more expensive than in the two other inns; an inscription on the post stated that the charge for a night was three hundred rubles. "Well," he thought, "I'll take a chance here too." He entered the inn, ate and drank his fill, then looked thoughtful. "Mr. Soldier, why are you so sad? Is it because you have no money to pay me with?" asked the host. "No, you have guessed wrong! What I am thinking is that although I am sated, my faithful horse is hungry." "How can that be? I have given him hay and oats, and plenty of them." "But our horses have this habit: if I am beside him, he will eat, but without me he won't even touch his feed." "Well, in that case, go to sleep in the stable." 
 Now that innkeeper's wife was a sorceress; she consulted her magic books and learned at once that the soldier had not a penny on him. She set laborers to watch at the gate and gave them strict orders to prevent the soldier from sneaking away. On the stroke of midnight Ivan rose and made ready to take to his heels, when he saw that laborers were standing on guard. He lay down again and fell asleep. He awoke at daybreak, saddled his horse in a hurry, mounted him, and rode off. "Halt!" cried the guards. "You have not paid the host; give us the money." "What money? Get out of my way!" cried Ivan, and he tried to gallop past them; but the laborers seized him and began to belabor him. They raised such a hubbub that the 
 
 
 
 whole house was aroused. "Beat him, boys, beat him to death!" everyone shouted. "That's enough!" said the host. "Let him live, let him stay three years with us and earn three hundred rubles." 
 There was nothing to be done, so Ivan, the merchant's son, stayed at the inn; he lived there for one day, a second day, and a third day. The host said to him: "Mr. Soldier, I suppose you have learned how to fire a gun." "Of course I have; that's what we are taught in the regiment." "Well, then go and shoot some game; there are all kinds of beasts and birds around here." Ivan took a gun and went hunting. For a long time he wandered in the woods but did not meet any game. Only at nightfall he sighted a hare at the edge of the forest; he took aim, but the hare darted off as fast as he could. The hunter rushed after him and came to a broad green meadow. On that meadow stood a splendid castle built of pure marble and covered with a golden roof. The hare jumped into the courtyard and Ivan after him; but the hare had vanished without a trace. "Well," he thought, "at least I will have a look at the castle." 
 He went in and walked in the chambers. Everywhere he found such magnificence as no mind can imagine and only a tale can tell of; and in one chamber the table was set with various viands and wines and splendid covers. Ivan drank a glassful from each bottle, ate a bit from each plate, and sat there reveling to his heart's delight. Suddenly a carriage rolled up to the porch and a princess arrived. She was black, and her retinue was black, and her horses were black. 
 Ivan remembered his military training, jumped up, and stood at attention at the door; the princess came into the chamber and he at once saluted her smartly. "Good evening, soldier!" the princess greeted him. "How have you come here, of your own will or by compulsion? Are you shirking a deed or trying to do one? Sit by my side, let us talk peacefully." Then the princess begged him: "Could you render me a great service? If you do, you will be happy. It is said that Russian soldiers fear nothing. Now, evil spirits have taken possession of this castle of mine." "Your Highness, I shall be glad to serve you to the last drop of my blood." "Well, then, listen carefully. Until 
 
 midnight, drink and make merry; but on the stroke of midnight, lie down on the bed that hangs by straps in the middle of the great chamber, and no matter what happens to you or what you fancy you see and hear, do not be afraid, but lie in silence." 
 Having said this, the princess took leave of him and went off. Ivan, the merchant's son, drank and made merry, and on the very stroke of midnight lay down in the appointed place. Suddenly a storm began to roar; it clattered and thundered, as though the walls might collapse at any moment and sink into the ground. The chambers were filled with devils, who yelled and shouted and began a hellish dance; and when they saw the soldier, they set themselves to frighten and torment him in every way possible. Out of nowhere Ivan's sergeant appeared and said: "Oh, Ivan, merchant's son, what have you done? You have been listed as a deserter; return to your regiment at once or you'll be sorry." 
 After the sergeant came the lieutenant, after the lieutenant the captain, and after the captain the colonel. "You scoundrel," said the colonel, "what are you doing here? I see that you want to run the gantlet! Hey, bring fresh sticks here!" The devils set to work and soon gathered a whole pile of fresh sticks, but Ivan Lay still and did not say a word. "Ah, you rascal," said the colonel, "so you aren't afraid of sticks at all; you must have seen worse than that during your service! Send me a squadron of soldiers with loaded guns, let them shoot him!" As though out of the ground a squadron of soldiers appeared; the command rang out, the soldiers took aim, they were about to fire. But suddenly the cocks crowed, and everything vanished in a trice-gone were the soldiers, the officers, and the sticks. 
 Next day the princess came to the castle; she was now white from her head down to her chest, and so also were her retinue and the horses. "Thank you, soldier!" said the princess. "You have seen terrors, but you will see worse. Mind you, do not take fright, serve me two nights more, and I will make you happy." They ate and drank and made merry together; then the prin- 
 
 cess left, and Ivan, the merchant's son, lay on his bed. At midnight a storm roared, there was a clatter and a thunder, the devils came running, they shouted and yelled. "Ah, brothers, the soldier is here again!" cried a lame, one-eyed little imp. "Isn't he a nuisance! What's your plan? Are you trying to drive us from this castle? Just wait, I'll go tell our grandfather." The grandfather came himself, ordered the devils to bring a forge, and to prepare red-hot iron rods. "Strike him with these hot rods to the very bones, that will teach him to intrude in other people's houses!" The devils had no sooner prepared the forge than the cocks crowed, and everything vanished in a trice. 
 On the third day the princess came to the castle, and Ivan marveled when he saw that she herself, her retinue, and their horses had all become white to their knees. "Thanks, soldier, for your loyal service," she said. "How is God favoring you?" "So far I am safe and sound, Your Highness!" "Well, try to be brave this last night. Here is a sheepskin for you; put it on, or the devils will get at you with their claws. They are terribly angry now." They sat at table together, ate, drank, and made merry; then the princess said farewell and left, and Ivan donned the sheepskin, made the sign of the cross, and lay down on his bed. 
 On the stroke of midnight a storm roared, and the whole castle shook with the clatter and thunder; a numberless host of devils came-lame ones, one-eyed ones, and many other kinds. They fell upon Ivan, crying: "Take the scoundrel, grab him, pull him!" They set to scratching him with their claws; one seized him, another seized him, but all the claws remained stuck in the sheepskin. "No, brothers, apparently one can't get him that way," one said. "Let us then take his own father and mother and skin them alive!" That very minute they dragged in Ivan's parents and began to skin them with their claws. The father and mother cried: "Ivan, dear son, have pity on us, leave that bed! It is because of you that we are being skinned alive." But Ivan lay without stirring or saying a word. Then the cocks crowed and suddenly everything vanished, as though it had never been there. 
 
 In the morning the princess came. Her horses were white, her retinue were white, and she herself was all pure and so beautiful that one cannot imagine a more beautiful lady: one could see her marrow flowing from bone to bone. "You have seen terrors," she said to Ivan, "but there won't be any more. Thanks for your kindness; now let us hasten away from here." "No, princess," said Ivan, the merchant's son, "let us rather rest for an hour or two." "What are you saying?" she asked. "If we stay here to rest we shall perish." They left the castle and set out on their way. After they had gone some distance, the princess said: "Look back, goodly youth, and see what is happening behind you." Ivan looked back, and not a trace was left of the castle; it had fallen through the ground, and where it had stood flames were blazing. 
 "We would have perished in those flames if we had lingered there," said the princess, and handed him a purse. "Take it. This is not an ordinary purse; if you need money, just shake it, and at once gold pieces will pour out of it, as many as your heart desires. Go now, pay your debt to the innkeeper, and come to such and such an island; I shall wait for you near the cathedral. There we shall attend mass and be married: you shall be my husband and I will be your wife. But mind you, don't be late; if you cannot come today, come tomorrow; if you cannot come tomorrow, come the day after; but if you miss on three days, you will never see me again." 
 They took leave of each other; the princess went to the right and Ivan to the left. He came to the inn, shook his purse before the host, and gold poured out of it. "Well, brother," said Ivan, "you thought a soldier has no money, and so he can be taken as a bondslave for three years; but you were wrong. Take what I owe you." He paid the innkeeper three hundred rubles, mounted on his horse, and rode where he had been told to go. "What a marvel! Whence did he get this money?" thought the innkeeper's wife. She consulted her books and saw that he had rescued the enchanted princess and that the princess had given him a purse that would keep him supplied with money forever. She called a boy, sent him to graze cows in the field, and gave him a magic apple. "A soldier will approach you and 
 
 ask you for water to drink," she said. "But tell him that you have no water and give him this juicy apple instead." 
 The boy drove the cows to the field. As soon as he was there- lo and behold-Ivan, the merchant's son, rode up to him. "Ah, brother," he said, "don't you have some water to drink? I am terribly thirsty." "No, soldier," the boy replied, "water is far from here. But I have a juicy apple; if you wish, eat it, maybe it will refresh you." Ivan took the apple, ate it, and was overwhelmed by heavy sleep; he slept for three days without awakening. The princess waited in vain for her betrothed, for three days in succession; then she decided that it was not her fate to be married to him. She sighed, seated herself in her carriage and drove off. She saw a boy grazing cows. "Little herdsman, have you not seen a goodly youth, a Russian soldier?" she asked. "He has been sleeping under this oak for three days," answered the boy. 
 The princess looked-and there was her soldier. She began to nudge him, in order to rouse him; but no matter how hard she tried, she could not awaken him. She took a piece of paper and a pencil and wrote this note: "Unless you go to such and such a ferry, you will not get to the thrice tenth kingdom and you will not be my husband." She put the note into Ivan's pocket, kissed him as he lay asleep, wept bitter tears, and drove far, far away. 
 Later at night Ivan awakened and did not know what to do. The boy said to him: "A lovely maiden has been here, and she was so well dressed! She tried to rouse you, but could not awaken you. So she wrote a note that she put in your pocket; then she got into her carriage and left." Ivan said his prayers to God, bowed low to all sides, and rode to the ferry. 
 After a long time or a short time he arrived there and cried to the ferrymen: "Hey, brothers, take me to the other side as fast as you can-and here is your pay in advance!" He drew out his purse, shook it, and filled their boat with gold. The ferrymen gasped. "But where are you going, soldier?" "To the thrice tenth kingdom." "Well, brother, by the roundabout way, it takes three years to get to that kingdom; by the straight way, it takes three hours. But there is no passage by the straight 
 
 way." "Then what shall I do?" "Listen and we'll tell you. A griffin comes here; it is as hig as a mountain, it seizes all kinds of carrion and takes it to the other shore. So do you cut open your horse's belly, and clean it and wash it, and we will sew you into it. The griffin will seize the carcass, carry it to the thrice tenth kingdom, and throw it to his young. Then do you crawl out of the horse's belly as fast as you can and go where you want to go." 
 Ivan cut off his horse's head, cut open his belly, cleaned it and washed it, and crawled inside; the ferrymen sewed up the horse's belly and hid themselves. Suddenly the griffin came flying, as big as a mountain; he seized the carcass, took it to the thrice tenth kingdom, threw it to his young, then flew away to look for new prey. Ivan cut open the horse's belly, crawled out, went to the king, and asked to be taken into his service. And in that thrice tenth kingdom the griffin was doing much mischief; every day they had given him a man to devour, otherwise he would have ruined the whole kingdom. 
 The king thought and thought, wondering what to do with Ivan, and then ordered him to be exposed to the vicious bird. The king's warriors took him, brought him to a garden, put him beside an apple tree, and said: "Guard this tree and let not a single apple disappear." Ivan stood on guard, when suddenly the griffin flew down, as big as a mountain. "Good day, brave youth," he said. "I did not know you were in the horse's belly, else I would have eaten you long ago." "God alone knows whether you would have eaten me or not," said Ivan. The monstrous bird dropped one lip to the ground and lifted the other high like a roof; he was ready to devour the goodly youth. Ivan swung his bayonet and pinned the lower lip of the griffin firmly to the damp earth; then he drew out his saber and began to lash out at the griffin. "Ah, goodly youth," said the bird, "don't cut me! I will make you a champion. Take the phial from under my left wing and drink from it, and you'll see for yourself." 
 Ivan took the phial, drank from it, felt great strength in himself, and attacked the bird even more fiercely than before; he just swung out and cut. "Ah, goodly youth, don't cut me!" 
 
 cried the griffin. "I will give you a second phial, from under my right wing." Ivan drank from the second phial, felt even greater strength in himself, and kept striking the griffin. "Ah, goodly youth, don't cut me!" the griffin begged. "I will guide you to your fortune. There are green meadows here; in these meadows grow three tall oaks, under those oaks are iron doors, and behind those doors are champion steeds; a time will come when they will be useful to you." Ivan listened to the bird, but kept on cutting him nonetheless; he cut the griffin into little pieces and gathered them into a huge pile. 
 Next morning the king summoned before him the general on duty and said: "Go and gather the bones of Ivan, the merchant's son; although he is from a foreign land, it is not fitting that human bones should lie about unburied." The general on duty rushed to the garden and saw that Ivan was alive and that the griffin was cut into shreds. He reported this to the king, who was overjoyed, praised Ivan, and gave him a letter patent written in his own hand, stating that Ivan had permission to go everywhere in the kingdom and eat and drink in all the inns and alehouses without paying. 
 Ivan, the merchant's son, having received his letter patent, went to the richest inn, drank ten gallons of wine, ate ten loaves of bread and half an ox, returned to the king's stable, and lay down to sleep. He lived thus in the king's stable for three full years. Then the princess appeared-she had taken the roundabout route. Her father was overjoyed and began to question her: "My beloved daughter, who rescued you from your bitter fate?" "Such and such a soldier, the son of a merchant." "He came here and did me a great service-he cut the griffin to pieces," the king said. What was there to talk about? Ivan, the merchant's son, was wedded to the princess, and a feast was given for all the people, and I was there and drank wine; it ran down my mustache but did not go into my mouth. 
 Shortly afterward the three-headed dragon wrote to the king: "Give me your daughter or I'll burn your whole kingdom with fire and scatter the ashes." The king was grieved, but Ivan, the merchant's son, drank ten gallons of wine, ate ten loaves of bread and half an ox, rushed to the green meadows, raised 
 
 an iron door, led out a champion steed, donned his steel sword and his battle mace, mounted the steed, and went forth to do battle. "Eh, goodly youth," said the dragon, "what are you trying to do? I will put you on one hand, and beat you with the other, and only a damp spot will remain where once you were." "Don't boast; say your prayers first," answered Ivan. He swung his steel sword and cut off all of the dragon's three heads at once. Then he conquered the six-headed dragon, and then the twelve-headed one, and his strength and valor became famous in all lands. 
 
 

