
 IN A CERTAIN LAND, in a certain big village, there lived a peasant who was neither poor nor rich. He had a son, and bequeathed to him three hundred rubles, saying: "Here, my son. I give you my blessing, with three hundred rubles when you come of age." The son grew up, came to the age of reason, and said to his mother: "I remember that my deceased father gave me his blessing with three hundred rubles; now give me at least one hundred of them." 
 She gave him a hundred rubles, and he took to the road. He met a peasant leading a flap-eared dog. He said: "Peasant, sell me that dog." The peasant said: "Give me a hundred rubles for it." He gave his hundred rubles for the dog, led him home, and gave him food and drink. Then he asked his mother for another hundred rubles. The mother gave him another hundred rubles, and he took to the road. Again he met a peasant, this time a fellow leading a cat with a golden tail. He said: "Peasant, sell me that cat." The peasant answered: "Buy him!" 
 
 "And what do you want for him?" The peasant answered: "If you want him, give me a hundred rubles." And he gave him the cat for a hundred rubles. The young man took the cat, led her home, and gave her drink and food. Then he again asked his mother for a hundred rubles. The mother said to him: "My beloved child, what do you spend the money on? Your purchases are useless." "Eh, mother, do not worry about the money; somehow it will come back to us." She gave him the third hundred, and he again took to the road. 
 So far, so good. Then, in a certain land, in a certain city, a princess died, and on her hand was a golden ring; our youth wanted badly to get this ring from her finger. He bribed the sentries to let him come near the princess' bier; he came very close to her, took the ring off her finger, and went home to his mother. No one had stopped him. 
 He lived at home for some time, a long time or a short time; then he went out on the porch and moved the ring from one hand to the other. Three hundred strong men and a hundred and seventy knights jumped out of the ring and said: "What work do you order us to do?" "This is what I order you to do. First, knock down my old hut and on the same spot build a stone house, and let my mother know nothing about it." They did this task in one night. His mother arose, and asked, surprised: "Whose house is this?" Her son answered: "Mother, be not surprised, but pray to God. This house is ours." And so they lived in it for some time, a long time or a short time, until the youth came to manhood and wanted to take him a wife. 
 In a certain kingdom in a certain land a certain king had a daughter, and our young man wanted to marry her. He said to his mother: "In such and such a kingdom, such and such a king has a beautiful daughter. Woo her for me, mother." The mother answered him: "My beloved child, how can such as we get a princess?" He answered her: "Mother, my good parent! Pray to the Savior, drink kvass, and go to bed. The morning is wiser than the evening." The good youth himself went on the porch, moved the ring from one hand to the other, and three hundred strong men and a hundred and seventy knights jumped out and asked him: "What do you order us to do?" "Find for me things 
 
 so precious that the king does not have them, and bring them to me on golden trays; I must give presents to the king and his daughter." They straightway brought him such things, and he sent his mother to the king to make the match for him. 
 The mother came to the king and he said with surprise: "Old woman, where did you get these things?" The princess came out, looked at them, and said: "Well, old woman, tell your son to build in one night in the king's sacred meadow a new palace more splendid than my father's own, and to hang a crystal bridge from one palace to the other, and to cover the crystal bridge with all kinds of embroidered rugs. If he does all this I will marry him. If he does not, there will be no pardon for him, and he must lay his rash head on the block!" 
 The old woman went home in tears and said to her son: "My beloved child, I told you not to seek the princess in marriage. Now she has ordered me to tell you that if you want to marry her, you must build a new palace in the sacred meadow in one night, and it must be more splendid than her father's own, and a crystal bridge must lead from one palace to the other, and this crystal bridge must be covered with all kinds of embroidered rugs; and if you fail to do these things you must lay your rash head on the block! Now what are you going to do, my child?" He answered: "Mother, my parent! Have no misgivings, pray to the Savior, drink kvass, and go to bed. The morning is wiser than the evening." 
 Our youth himself went on the porch, moved the ring from one hand to the other, and three hundred strong men and a hundred and seventy knights jumped out and asked: "What do you order us to do?" He said to them: "My dear friends, try in one night to build for me a new palace in the king's sacred meadow, and let it be more splendid than the king's own, and let a crystal bridge hang between one palace and the other, and let this bridge be covered with all kinds of embroidered rugs." In one night the strong men and knights built everything they were commanded to build. In the morning the king rose, looked at his sacred meadow through a spyglass, marveled at the new palace more splendid than his own, and sent a messenger to tell the good youth that he could come to woo the princess 
 
 and that the princess had agreed to marry him. So the match was made, the wedding was celebrated, and a great feast was held. 
 They lived together for some time, a long time or a short time, and then the princess asked her husband: "Please tell me how you accomplished such a thing in one night? From now on we shall think together." She flattered him, exhorted him, and served him all kinds of liquors. She made him dead drunk, and he told her what she wanted to know: "I did it with this ring!" She took the ring from the drunken man, moved it from one hand to the other, and three hundred strong men and a hundred and seventy knights jumped out and asked her: "What do you command us to do?" "This I command. Take that drunkard and throw him on my father's meadow, and carry me with the whole palace beyond thrice nine and three lands, beyond the tenth kingdom, to such and such a king." In one night they carried her to where she bade them. 
 In the morning the king arose, looked through the spyglass at his sacred meadow, and there was no palace and no crystal bridge; only one man was lying there. The king sent forth messengers, saying: "Find out what man is lying there." The messengers went there, came back, and said to the king: "Your son-in-law is lying there alone!" "Go and bring him to me." They brought him and the king asked: "What did you do with the princess and the palace?" He answered: "Your Majesty, I do not know; it is as though I lost her while I was asleep." The king said: "I give you three months' time to discover where the princess is-else I will put you to death." And he put the good youth into a strong dungeon. 
 Then the cat said to the flap-eared dog: "Imagine it! Our master is in prison. The princess deceived him, took the ring off his finger, and went away beyond thrice nine lands, beyond the tenth kingdom. We must get the ring; let us run together!" They ran; whenever they had to cross a lake or a river, the cat sat on the neck of the flat-eared dog, and the dog carried her to the other side. After some time, a long time or a short time, they ran beyond thrice nine lands, beyond the tenth kingdom. The cat said to the dog: "If someone from the king's kitchen sends for wood, do you run at once. I will go to the pantry, to the housekeeper; whatever she wants, I will serve." 
 They began to live in the king's palace. The housekeeper said to the king: "In my pantry there is a cat with a golden tail; whatever I want, she serves!" The cook said: "And I have a flap-eared dog; when I send the boy for wood, he rushes out and gets it." The king answered: "Bring the flap-eared dog to my bedroom." And the princess said: "And to me bring the cat with the golden tail." The dog and cat were brought, and stayed in the palace night and day. But whenever she went to sleep, the princess put the ring in her mouth. One night a mouse ran across the princess' chamber and the cat snatched him by the neck. The mouse said: "Do not harm me, cat! I know what you have come for; you have come for the ring, and I will get it for you." The cat let him go; he jumped on the bed, straight on the princess, stuck his tail into her mouth and wiggled it; the princess spat and spat out the ring. The cat snatched it and cried to the flap-eared dog: "Hurry!" 
 They jumped out of the window and ran. They ran over land and swam across lakes and rivers; they arrived in their kingdom and went straight to the prison. The cat climbed in; her master saw her and began to stroke her. The cat sang songs and put the ring on his hand; the master was overjoyed and moved it from one hand to the other, and three hundred strong men and a hundred and seventy knights jumped out and said: "What do you order us to do?" He said: "To ease my grief, I want magnificent music played for a whole day." The music began to play. And the king sent a messenger to him to ask whether he had considered the matter. The messenger went and became absorbed in listening to the music; the king sent another messenger, and he too became absorbed in listening; the king sent a third one, and he too became absorbed in listening. Then the king himself went to his son-in-law, and the king too was bewitched by the music. As soon as the music stopped, the king began to question his son-in-law, who answered: "Your Majesty, free me for one night, and in a trice I will get your daughter." 
 He went on the porch and moved the ring from one hand to 
 
 the other. Three hundred strong men and a hundred and seventy knights jumped out and asked him: "What do you order us to do?" "Bring back the princess, with the entire palace, and let everything be in the old place and done in one night." The princess arose in the morning, saw that she was in the old place, and became frightened because she did not know what would happen to her. Her husband came to the king. "Your Majesty," he asked, "what punishment shall we give the princess?" "My dear son-in-law, let us exhort her with words, and then do you two live together and prosper!" 
