
 IN A certain town there lived a thief who caused much sorrow. One day he happened to rob a wealthy man; the theft was discovered and men were sent in pursuit of the thief. He ran for a long time through the woods, but in front of these woods there was an open steppe that extended for at least ten versts. When the thief reached the edge of the woods, he stopped and wondered what to do next. If he ran over the steppe, he would be caught at once, for there everything could be seen from a distance of two versts; and he heard his pursuers coming closer. Then he began to pray: "Lord, forgive my sinful soul; hide me, Father Nicholas, and I will set a ten kopek candle before your image." 
 Suddenly out of nowhere an aged man appeared and asked the thief: "What did you just say?" The thief answered: "I said: 'Father Nicholas, hide me in this wilderness.' And I promised to put a candle before his image." And he confessed his sin to the old man, who said: "Creep into this piece of carrion." For a piece of carrion was lying nearby. The thief had no other choice than to creep into the carrion, for he did not want to be caught. He crept in, and that very minute the old man became invisible. He was Father Nicholas himself. 
 Now the pursuers came nearer; the men rode out on the steppe, rode for half a verst, and, seeing nothing, turned back. 
 
 Meanwhile the thief lay in the carrion, hardly able to breathe, so foul was the smell. When his pursuers left, he crept out and saw the same old man standing near by, gathering wax. The thief approached him and thanked him for his rescue. Then the old man asked again: "What did you promise Father Nicholas when you sought refuge?" The thief answered: "I promised to buy him a ten kopek candle." "Well, just as you were stifled lying in that carrion, so Father Nicholas would be stifled by your candle." And the old man admonished him: "Never pray to the Lord and his saints to help you in evil deeds; for the Lord does not bless evil deeds. Now heed my words, and tell others never to pray to God for help in evil deeds!" Having said this, he vanished from sight. 
