
 Once there lived an old man who had three daughters: the two elder ones were fond of frills and furbelows, but the youngest was concerned only with household tasks. One day the father made ready to go to town and asked his daughters what they wanted him to buy for them. The 
 
 eldest said: "Buy me cloth for a dress." The second said the same thing. "And what shall I huy for you, my heloved daughter?" the father asked the youngest. "My dear father, huy me a feather of Finist the Bright Falcon." The father said farewell to them and went to town; he nought enough cloth for dresses for his two elder daughters, hut nowhere could he find a feather of Finist the Bright Falcon. He returned home, and his elder daughters were overjoyed with their new cloth. "But I could not find a feather of Finist the Bright Falcon for you," he said to the youngest. "So he it," she said, "perhaps next time you will have better luck." The elder sisters cut their cloth, made themselves dresses, and made fun of their younger sister, hut she only kept silent. 
 The father again made ready to go to town and asked: "Well, my daughters, what shall I huy for you?" The first and the second each asked for a kerchief, but the youngest said: "Buy me a feather of Finist the Bright Falcon." The father went to town, bought two kerchiefs, but could not find the feather. He returned home and said: "Ah, my daughter, again I could not find a feather of Finist the Bright Falcon." "Never mind, father, perhaps you will have better luck next time." 
 The father made ready to go to town a third time and asked his daughters what he should buy for them. The elder ones said: "Buy us earrings." But the youngest again said: "Buy me a feather of Finist the Bright Falcon." The father bought two pairs of gold earrings and began to look for the feather, but no one had ever heard of that falcon; he became sad and left town. He had no sooner passed through the gate than he met an old man carrying a little box. "What are you carrying, old man?" "A feather of Finist the Bright Falcon." "What do you want for it?" "I'll take a thousand." The father paid this sum and galloped home with the little box. His daughters came out to meet him. "Well, my beloved daughter," he said to the youngest, "at last I have brought a present for you. Take it." The youngest daughter almost jumped with joy; she took the box, began to kiss and fondle it, and pressed it tightly to her bosom. 
 After supper all of them went to their rooms to sleep; the 
 
 youngest daughter too went to her room, and opened her hox; the feather of Finist the Bright Falcon flew out at once; it struck the floor and a handsome prince appeared before the maiden. They began to speak to each other, with sweet and loving words. The elder sisters overheard them and asked: "Little sister, with whom are you talking?" "With myself," said the lovely maiden. "Well then, open the door." The prince struck the floor and turned into a feather; the maiden put the feather back in the box and opened the door. The sisters looked in all the corners but found no one. As soon as they had left the lovely maiden opened the window, took out the feather, and said: "Fly, my feather, into the open field; stay there until the right time comes." The feather turned into a bright falcon and flew into the open field. 
 The next night Finist the Bright Falcon came flying to his maiden; they began to talk merrily. The elder sisters overheard them and straightway ran to their father. "Father, someone comes to see our sister at night; even now he is in there talking with her." The father arose and went to his youngest daughter's room, but the prince had long since turned into the feather and lay in the box. "Ah, you malicious girls," the father scolded his elder daughters, "why do you accuse her falsely? Better mind your own business." 
 The next day the sisters hit upon a ruse: at nightfall, when the yard was quite dark, they took a ladder, gathered sharp knives and needles, and stuck them in the lovely maiden's window. At night Finist the Bright Falcon came flying. He struggled and struggled, but could not get into the room; he only cut his wings. "Farewell, lovely maiden," he said, "if you decide to find me, look for me beyond thrice nine lands, in the thrice tenth kingdom. But before you can find me, the goodly youth, you will wear out three pairs of iron shoes, break three cast-iron staves, and gnaw away three stone wafers." But the maiden slept on; although she heard these unkind words in her sleep, she could not waken and arise. 
 In the morning she woke and saw knives and needles stuck in the window, and blood trickling from them. She wrung her 
 
 hands. "Ah my God! My sisters must have killed my beloved!" Straightway she made ready and left home. She ran to a smithy, forged for herself three pairs of iron shoes and three cast-iron staves, provided herself with three stone wafers, and set out to seek Finist the Bright Falcon. 
 She walked and walked, and wore out one pair of shoes, broke one cast-iron staff, and gnawed away one stone wafer. She came to a hut and knocked at the door. "Host and hostess," she said, "shelter me from the dark night!" An old woman answered: "You are welcome, lovely maiden! Whither are you going, little dove?" "Ah, grandmother! I am going in search of Finist the Bright Falcon." "Well, lovely maiden, you have a long way to go." Next morning the old woman said: "Go now to my second sister, she will tell you what to do. And here is my gift to you-a silver spinning wheel and a golden spindle. You will spin a spindleful of flax and draw out a golden thread." Then she took a ball, rolled it out to the road, and told the maiden to follow the ball wherever it went. The maiden thanked the old woman and followed the ball. 
 After a long time or a short time, the second pair of shoes was worn out, the second staff was broken, and another stone wafer gnawed away; finally the ball rolled up to a little hut. The maiden knocked at the door, saying: "My good hosts, shelter a lovely maiden from the dark night!" "You are welcome," answered an old woman. "Whither are you going, lovely maiden?" "Grandmother, I am going in search of Finist the Bright Falcon." "You have a long way to go," said the old woman. Next morning, she gave the maiden a silver dish and a golden egg. "Go to my elder sister," she said. "She will know where to find Finist the Bright Falcon." 
 The lovely maiden said farewell to the old woman and set out on her way. She walked and walked, and the third pair of shoes was worn out, the third staff was broken, and the last wafer gnawed away, when the ball rolled up to a little hut. The traveler knocked at the door and said: "My good hosts, shelter a lovely maiden from the dark night." Again an old woman came out. "Come in, little dove, you are welcome! Whence come you and whither are you going?" "Grandmother, I go 
 
 in search of Finist the Bright Falcon." "Oh, it is hard, very hard to find him! He is now living in such and such a town, and is married to the wafer baker's daughter there." In the morning the old woman said to the lovely maiden: "Here is a gift for you-a golden embroidery frame and a needle; just hold the frame and the needle will embroider by itself. Now God speed you, and ask the wafer baker to hire you as her serving maid." 
 The lovely maiden did as she was bid. She came to the wafer baker's house and became a servant; she worked hard and quickly, heating the stove, carrying water, cooking the dinner. The wafer baker looked on and was delighted. "Thank God," she said to her daughter, "we now have a servant who is willing and intelligent; she does everything without having to be told." And the lovely maiden, having done all the housework, took her silver loom and her golden spindle and sat down to spin; she spun, drawing threads from the flax, and the threads were not ordinary ones but of pure gold. The wafer baker's daughter saw this and said: "Ah, lovely maiden, won't you sell me your wheel and spindle?" "I might." "And what is your price?" "Let me spend one night with your husband." The wafer baker's daughter consented. "There is no harm in it," she thought. "After all, I can give him a sleeping potion, and with that spindle my mother and I will enrich ourselves." 
 Finist the Bright Falcon was not at home; all day long he soared in the skies, returning only at nightfall. They sat down to supper; the lovely maiden served the viands and kept looking at him, but he, the goodly youth, did not recognize her. The wafer baker's daughter added a sleeping potion to his drink, put him to bed, and said to the servant: "Now go to his room and chase the flies from him." The lovely maiden chased the flies and shed bitter tears. "Awake, arise, Finist the Bright Falcon! I, the lovely maiden, have come to you; I have broken three cast-iron staves, worn out three pairs of iron shoes, and gnawed three stone wafers, and all that time I have been seeking you." But Finist slept on and did not hear anything; thus the night went by. 
 The next day, the maiden took her silver dish and rolled her 
 
 golden egg on it; and many a golden egg did she roll out. The wafer baker's daughter saw this and said: "Sell me your plaything." "Buy it." "And what is the price?" "Let me spend another night with your husband." "Very well, I agree." And Finist the Bright Falcon again soared all day in the skies and flew back home only at nightfall. They sat down to supper; the lovely maiden served the viands and kept looking at him, but it was as though he had never known her. Again the wafer baker's daughter made him drunk with a sleeping potion, put him to bed, and sent the servant to chase the flies from him. And this time too, no matter how much the lovely maiden wept and tried to rouse him, he slept through till the morning and heard nothing. 
 On the third day, the lovely maiden sat holding the golden embroidery frame, and the needle embroidered by itself-and what wondrous designs it made! The wafer baker's daughter could not keep her eyes off this work and said: "Lovely maiden, sell me your plaything!" "Buy it." "And what is the price?" "Let me spend a third night with your husband." "Very well, I agree." At night Finist the Bright Falcon came home; his wife made him drunk with a sleeping potion, put him to bed, and sent the servant to chase the flies from him. The lovely maiden chased the flies while imploring him tearfully: "Arise, awake, Finist the Bright Falcon! I, the lovely maiden, have come to you; I have broken three cast-iron staves, worn out three pairs of iron shoes, and gnawed away three stone wafers, and all that time I have been seeking you, my beloved." But Finist the Bright Falcon was sound asleep and felt nothing. 
 The maiden wept a long time, she spoke to him a long time; suddenly one of her tears fell on his cheek.and he awoke on the instant. "Ah," he said, "something has burned me." "Finist the Bright Falcon," said the lovely maiden, "I have come to you; I have broken three cast-iron staves, worn out three pairs of iron shoes, and gnawed away three stone wafers, and all the time I have been seeking you! This is the third night that I have stood beside you while you slept and did not waken and did not answer my words." Only now did Finist the Bright Falcon recognize her, and he was overjoyed beyond all words. They 
 
 formed a plan and left the wafer baker's daughter. In the morning she discovered that her husband was gone and the servant too. She complained to her mother, who ordered the horses put to and rushed after them. She drove and drove and stopped at the houses of the three old women, but did not overtake Finist the Bright Falcon; all trace of him had long since disappeared. 
 Finist and his destined bride found themselves near her father's house. Finist struck the damp earth and turned into a feather; the lovely maiden took it, hid it in her bosom, and went to her father. "Ah, my beloved daughter, I thought you had perished; where have you been so long?" "I went to pray to God." It was just then Holy Week. The father and the elder daughters made ready to go to matins. "Well, my dear daughter," he said to the youngest, "make ready and come with us; this is a joyful day." "Father, I have nothing to wear." "Put on our dresses," said the elder sisters. "Ah, sisters, your dresses won't lit me; I'd rather stay home." 
 The father with his two elder daughters went to matins, and then the lovely maiden took out her feather. It struck the floor and turned into a handsome prince. The prince whistled at the window and straightway there appeared dresses and mantles and a golden carriage. They dressed themselves, sat in the carriage, and went to church. When they entered, they stood before everyone and the people marveled to see that a prince and princess had come. When the service was over they left before everyone else; the carriage and the splendid raiments disappeared, and the prince turned into a feather. The father and the two elder daughters returned. "Oh, sister," they said, "you did not come with us, and a handsome prince and a marvelous princess were there." "Never mind, sisters! Since you have told me all about it, it is as though I had been there myself." 
 The next day the same thing happened again. And on the third day, when the prince and the lovely maiden rode in their carriage, the father went out of the church and with his own eyes saw the carriage drive up to his house and then vanish. The father came home and began to question his youngest 
 
 
 
 daughter. She said: "There is nothing to be done, I have to confess everything." She took out the feather; the feather struck the floor and turned into the prince. They were married at once, and the wedding was a magnificent one! 

