
 IN A certain village there lived a peasant who had a dog; when the dog was young, he guarded the whole house, but when wretched old age came, he ceased even to bark. His master became disgusted with him; so he made ready, took a rope, tied it around the dog's neck, and led him to the woods. He came to an aspen tree and wanted to strangle the dog, but seeing that bitter tears were rolling down the snout of the old cur, his heart was moved and he took pity on him; he tied the dog to the aspen tree and went home. The poor dog remained in the woods and began to weep and curse his lot. 
 Suddenly a huge wolf came from behind the bushes, saw the dog, and said: "Good day, spotted cur! I have been waiting a long time for your visit. In times past you drove me out of your house, but now you have come to me and I can do with you as I please. Now I will pay you back for everything!" "And what do you want to do with me, little gray wolf?" "Not much; -just eat you up, skin and bones." "Ah, you foolish gray wolf!" said the dog. "You are so fat that you no longer know what you are doing; after eating savory beef you wish to eat old, lean dog meat? Why should you stupidly break your old teeth on me? My flesh is now like rotten wood. I will give you a better idea: go bring me a hundred pounds or so of excellent horseflesh; let me gain a little weight, then do with me what you please." 
 The wolf heeded the dog, went away, and came back with half a mare. "Here is meat for you!" he said. "Now mind you, fatten yourself up!" Having said this he left. The dog set to eating the meat and ate up all of it. Two days later the gray wolf came and said to the dog: "Well, brother, have you gained weight or not?" "Just a little bit; but if you would bring me a sheep, my flesh would become much sweeter!" The wolf consented to that too, ran to the open field, lay in a hollow, and waited for the shepherd. When the shepherd came by with his flock, the wolf from behind the bush chose a big fat sheep, 
 
 jumped upon her, seized her by her neck, and dragged her to the dog. "Here is a sheep for you, to help you get fat," he said. The dog set to work, ate up the sheep, and felt his strength coming back to him. The wolf came and asked: "Well, brother, how do you feel now?" "I am still a little thin. If you would bring me a boar I would get as fat as a pig." The wolf got a boar, brought it to the dog, and said: "This is my last service to you. In two days I shall come to see you." "Very well," thought the dog, "I shall be able to cope with you then." 
 Two days later the wolf came to the well fed dog; when the dog saw him, he began to bark. "Ah, you foul cur," said the gray wolf, "how dare you abuse me?" And he jumped on the dog to tear him to pieces. But the dog had gathered strength; he reared up on his hind legs and began to give the gray wolf such a beating that tufts of his fur flew out in all directions. The wolf wrested himself free and took to his heels; he ran some distance and wanted to stop, but when he heard the dog's bark he ran again. He came to the woods, lay under a bush, and began to lick the wounds the dog had inflicted upon him. "How this foul cur cheated me," the wolf said to himself. "The next time I get hold of anyone, I'll clamp my teeth down and he won't get away so easily." 
 So the wolf licked his wounds and went to look for new booty. He saw a big he-goat standing on a hill, went to him, and said: "Goat, I have come to eat you." "Ah, gray wolf," said the goat, "why should you break your old teeth on me? Rather, stand against the hill and open your jaws wide; I will take a run and jump straight into your mouth, then you can swallow me." The wolf stood against the hill and opened his jaws wide, but the goat had his own plan; he flew down the hill like an arrow and hit the wolf with such force that the wolf was knocked off his feet. Then the goat ran out of sight. After about three hours the wolf came to with a splitting headache. He began to wonder whether he had swallowed the goat or not. He thought and thought, and wondered and wondered. "If I had eaten the goat, my belly would be full; but I think the scoundrel deceived me. Well, henceforth I shall know what to do." 
 Having said this, the wolf ran to the village. He saw a pig 
 
 with little piglets and wanted to seize one piglet, but the pig would not let him. "Ah, you swinish snout," the wolf said to her, "how dare you be so boorish? I will tear you to pieces and swallow your young in one gulp." The pig answered: "Well, so far I have not abused you; but now I shall make bold to say that you are a great fool." "Why?" "This is why-just judge for yourself, gray one. How can you eat my piglets? They are just born. They have to be washed clean. Let us be friendly, neighbor, and baptize these little children." The wolf consented-so far so good. They came to a big water mill. The pig said to the wolf: "You, dear godfather, stand on this side of the barrier, where there is no water, and I will go to the other side, plunge the piglets in clear water, and hand them over to you one by one." The wolf was overjoyed, thinking, "Now I'll get the prize in my jaws." The gray wolf went under the bridge and the pig seized the barrier with her teeth and raised it. The water rushed through, dragging the wolf with it and whirling him around in the eddies. The pig and her piglets went their way; when the pig came home she ate her fill, fed her children, and lay down on a soft bed. 
 The gray wolf realized that the pig had cunningly tricked him. He managed somehow to get to the shore, and ran about the woods with an empty stomach. He starved for a long time, then could not bear it any longer, went back to the village, and saw some carrion lying near a barn. "That's fine," he thought. "When night comes I shall at least eat some carrion." For bad times had come upon the wolf; he was glad to have a meal of carrion. Even that was better than to have one's teeth chattering from hunger and to be singing wolfish songs. Night came; the wolf went to the barn and began to gobble the carrion. But a hunter had long been lying in wait for him with a couple of good bullets made ready in advance; he fired his gun and the gray wolf rolled on the ground with a smashed head. And that was the end of the gray wolf. 
 

