
 A certain prince decided to get married and had a particu-lar bride in mind, a beautiful princess, but he did not know how to win her. Kings and princes and brave champions from many lands had wooed her, but had achieved nothing. They had only lost their rash heads, which were stuck on the fence poles around the palace of the proud maiden. The prince was sad and distressed and wondered who would help him. Then appeared Ivan the Naked, a poor peasant who had nothing to eat or drink and whose clothes had long since fallen from his shoulders. He came to the prince and said: "You cannot win the maiden by yourself, and if you go to woo her alone, you will lose your rash head. It would be better if 
 
 we went together. I shall save you from danger and arrange the whole match. Only promise to obey me." The prince promised to follow the peasant's advice, and the very next day they set out on their journey. 
 They arrived in the maiden's kingdom and began to woo her. The princess said: "First, the bridegroom must prove his strength." She invited the prince to a feast and regaled him lavishly; after dinner the guests began to play various games. "Now bring me my gun that I take on the hunt," said the princess to her attendants. The door opened and forty men appeared, carrying not a gun but a cannon. "Well, my intended bridegroom," said the princess, "fire my gun." "Ivan," said the prince, "see whether this gun is any good." Ivan the Naked took the gun out on the porch, gave it a shove with his foot, and it flew far away and fell into the blue sea. "No, Your Majesty," reported Ivan the Naked, "it is a wretched gun, unfit to be fired by a champion like yourself." "What is the meaning of this, princess?" said the prince. "Do you wish to make mock of me? You asked me to fire a gun that my servant hurled into the sea with a single kick." 
 The princess ordered her bow and arrow to be brought. Again the door opened and forty men carried in the bow and arrow. "My intended bridegroom, see if you can shoot an arrow with my bow." "Eh, Ivan," cried the prince, "see whether this bow is fit for me to shoot with." Ivan the Naked drew the bow and shot the arrow: it flew a hundred versts, hit Marko the Runner, and shot off both his hands. Marko the Runner cried in a mighty voice: "Ah you, Ivan the Naked, you have shot off both my hands; but you will not escape misfortune either." Ivan the Naked took the bow and broke it in twain. "Prince," he said, "it is a wretched bow, unfit to be used by a champion like yourself." "What is the meaning of this, princess?" the prince said. "What kind of bow have you given me? My servant drew it, shot an arrow with it, and it broke in twain at once." 
 The princess ordered her spirited steed to be brought from the stable. Forty men led the steed and could hardly keep him on his chain halter, so fierce and untamable was he. "Well, my intended bridegroom," said the maiden, "take a ride on my 
 
 steed. I myself ride him every morning." The prince cried: "Eh, Ivan, see whether this horse is fit for me to ride." Ivan the Naked ran to the horse and began to stroke him; he stroked him for some time, then took his tail, gave it a pull, and tore off his skin. "No," he said, "it is a wretched nag. I barely touched his tail and his whole skin came off." The prince complained: "Eh, princess, you are still making mock of me; instead of giving me a mighty steed you gave me a miserable jade." The princess ceased trying the prince's strength and married him the next day. After the wedding they lay down to sleep; the princess put her hand on the prince's body and he could barely endure it; he began to lose his breath. "Ah," thought the princess, "so that is the kind of champion you are! Very well then, I'll show you!" 
 One month later the prince made ready to go to his own kingdom with his young wife. They rode one day, two days, three days, then stopped to give their horses a rest. The princess climbed out of the carriage, saw that Ivan the Naked was sound asleep, took an ax, and cut off both his feet. Then she ordered the horses put to her carriage, commanded the prince to stand on the footboard behind, and returned to her kingdom, leaving Ivan in the open field. 
 One day Marko the Runner passed through that field. He saw Ivan, spoke to him in a friendly fashion, took him on his back, and went with him into a deep dark forest. The champions began to live in the forest. They built themselves a hut, made themselves a little wagon, got a gun, and hunted birds of passage. Marko the Runner dragged the wagon, and Ivan the Naked sat in it, shooting birds. They fed on this game all year round. 
 After a while they grew weary of their life and decided to steal a maiden from her father and mother. They went to a certain priest and asked him for alms. The priest's daughter came out of the house, bringing them bread. As soon as she was near the wagon, Ivan seized her by her hands, sat her next to himself, and Marko ran with them at full speed. A minute later they were in their hut. "Maiden," they said, "be our sister, cook our dinner and supper, and look after the house." Thus 
 
 they lived peacefully and quietly and did not complain of their lot. 
 One day the champions went hunting, stayed away for a whole week, and upon their return could hardly recognize their sister, she had grown so thin. "What has happened to you?" they asked her. She told them that a dragon had flown to her every day and that she had grown thin because of him. "We will catch him," said the champions. Ivan the Naked lay under the bench and Marko the Runner hid behind the door in the entrance hall. About half an hour later, the trees in the forest suddenly began to rustle and the roof of the hut shook: the dragon came, struck the damp earth, turned into a goodly youth, sat at table, and asked for food. Ivan seized him by his feet and Marko fell upon the dragon with all his body and thrashed him terribly. Then they dragged the dragon to an oaken stump, split the stump, stuck his head into the crack, and began to flog him with rods. The dragon implored them: "Let me go, mighty champions! In return, I'll show where to find the water of life and the water of death." 
 The champions consented. The dragon led them to a lake; Marko was overjoyed and wanted to jump into the water at once, but Ivan held him back. "First we must try it," he said. He took a green twig and threw it into the water; the twig burned at once. Again the champions set upon the dragon; they drubbed him and drubbed him till he was more dead than alive. He led them to another lake; Ivan picked up a rotten trunk and cast it into the water; it sprouted at once and grew green leaves. The champions jumped into the lake, bathed in it, and came ashore with new limbs: Ivan had his feet and Marko his hands. They took the dragon, dragged him to the first lake, and threw him in-and only smoke was left of him. 
 They returned home. Marko the Runner was old. He brought the priest's daughter back to her father and mother and began to live with them, because the priest had declared that whosoever brought his daughter back would be allowed to live and eat in his house till the end of his days. But Ivan the Naked got himself a mighty steed and went to look for his prince. He rode by an open field and saw the prince tending swine. "Hail, 
 
 prince!" he said. "Hail!" answered the prince. "And who are you?" "I am Ivan the Naked." "Why do you boast like that? If Ivan the Naked were alive, I would not be a swineherd." "This is the end of your toil," said Ivan. They exchanged clothes. The prince rode ahead on the mighty steed and Ivan the Naked followed him driving the swine. The princess saw him, ran out on the porch, and cried: "Ah, you good-for-nothing! Who told you to drive the pigs home before sunset?" Then she ordered the swineherd to be seized and thrashed in the stable. Ivan the Naked did not wait. He seized the princess by her braid and dragged her around the yard until she repented and solemnly promised to obey her husband in everything. After that the prince and the princess lived in concord for many years, and Ivan the Naked served them. 

