
 A wolf and a fox lived together in true friendship. They had a little keg of honey. The fox liked sweets; she lay with her crony the wolf in their little house and stealthily rapped the floor with her tail. "Friend fox," said the wolf, "there's a knocking at the door." "Ah, it's someone coming to ask me to help deliver a child," murmured the fox. "Well, go then," said the wolf. The fox went out of the house, straight to the honey keg, licked her fill of it, and returned. "What has God given?" asked the wolf. "A first child," said the fox. 
 Another time, the fox again lay quietly rapping her tail. "Friend, I hear a knocking," said the wolf. "It's probably someone who needs a midwife." "Well, go then." The fox again went to the honey keg and licked her fill of it, so that only a 
 
 little remained at the bottom. "What has God given?" asked the wolf. "A second child." Then the fox cheated the wolf still a third time, and finished all the honey. "What has God given?" asked the wolf. "A last child." 
 After some time, a long time or a short time, the fox pretended to be ill and asked her friend the wolf to bring her some honey. He went to the keg and found that not even a drop was left. "Friend, friend," cried the wolf, "the honey is all eaten up!" "What do you mean?" asked the fox angrily. "Who could have eaten it except you?" The wolf swore that it was not he. "Very well, then," said the fox, "let us lie in the sun; whoever sweats out the honey is the culprit." They lay down in the sun. The fox did not sleep but the gray wolf snored with his whole snout. After a while, the fox got hold of some honey and quickly smeared the wolf with it. "Friend, friend," she said, nudging the wolf, "what's this? Who has eaten the honey?" The wolf had no choice but to admit his guilt. 
 There's a tale for you, and a crock of butter for me. 
 THE FOX, THE HARE, AND THE COCK 
 ONCE UPON A time there lived a fox and a hare. The fox had a hut made of ice, and the hare a hut made of lime tree bark. The radiant spring came and the fox's hut melted, while the hare's stood as before. The fox asked the hare to let her in to warm herself and then drove him out. The hare walked along the road weeping, and met some dogs. "Bow-bow-bow, why are you weeping, little hare?" The hare said: "Let me alone, dogs! How can I help weeping? I had a hut made of lime tree bark and the fox had a hut made of ice; she begged me to let her into my hut, then drove me out." "Don't weep, hare!" said the dogs. "We shall drive her out." "No you won't." 
 
 'Yes we shall!" They came to the hut and barked: "Bow-bow-bow! Go away, fox!" But the fox replied from the stove: "As I jump out, as I leap out, only tufts will fly all around!" The dogs took fright and ran away. 
 Again the hare walked down the road weeping. He met a bear. "Why are you weeping, hare?" And the hare said: "Let me alone, bear! How can I help weeping? I had a hut made of lime tree bark, and the fox had a hut made of ice; she begged me to let her into my hut, then drove me out." "Don't weep, hare, I'll drive her out." "No you won't! The dogs tried it and could not, and you will do no better." "I shall!" So they both went to drive out the fox. "Go away, fox!" growled the bear. The fox replied from the stove: "As I jump out, as I leap out, only tufts will fly all around!" The bear took fright and ran away. 
 Again the hare walked down the road weeping, and met a bull. "Why are you weeping, hare?" "Let me alone, bull! How can I help weeping? I had a hut made of lime tree bark, and the fox had a hut made of ice; she begged me to let her into my hut, then drove me out." "Let us go there, I will drive her out!" "No, bull, you won't! The dogs tried it and couldn't; the bear tried it and couldn't; and you will do no better." "I shall!" They went to the hut. "Go away, fox!" roared the bull. But the fox replied from the stove: "As I jump out, as I leap out, only tufts will fly all around!" The bull took fright and ran away. 
 Again the hare walked down the road weeping, and met a cock carrying a sickle. "Cock-a-doodle-doo! Why are you weeping, hare?" "Let me alone, cock! How can I help weeping? I had a hut made of lime tree bark, and the fox had a hut made of ice; she begged me to let her into my hut, then drove me out." "Let us go there, I will drive her out." "No you won't! The dogs tried it and couldn't; the bear tried it and couldn't; the bull tried it and couldn't; and you will do no better." "Yes I shall!" They came to the hut: "Cock-a-doodle-doo!" crowed the cock. "I have a sickle on my shoulders, I am going to cut the fox to pieces! Get out, fox!" The fox heard the cock, took fright, and said: "I am getting dressed!" The cock called again: "Cock-a-doodle-doo! I have a sickle on my shoulders, I am 
 
 going to cut the fox to pieces! Get out, fox!" The fox said: "I am putting on my fur!" The cock shrilled for the third time: "Cock-a-doodle-doo! I have a sickle on my shoulders, I am going to cut the fox to pieces! Get out, fox!" The fox ran out; the cock cut her with his sickle, and began to live with the hare and to prosper. 
 There's a tale for you, and a crock of butter for me. 

