
 A fox was running in the woods; she saw a woodcock on a tree and said to him: "Terenti, Terenti, I've been to town!" "Bu-bu-bu, bu-bu-bu, if you've been, you've been!" "Terenti, Terenti, I learned about a new law!" "Bu-bu-bu, bu-bu-bu, if you've learned, you've learned!" "A law forbidding you woodcocks to perch on trees, and ordering you always to walk in the green meadows!" "Bu-bu-bu, bu-bu-bu, to walk is to walk!" "Terenti, who is coming over there?" asked the fox, hearing the trampling of horses' feet and the barking of dogs. "A peasant." "Who is running after him?" "A colt." "And how does he hold his tail?" "It's twisted to one side." "Now farewell, Terenti, I have urgent business at home!" 
 THE FOX AND THE CRANE 
 THE FOX AN THE CRANE used to be good friends, they even stood godparents for the same child. The fox wanted to treat the crane to dinner and invited him to her house: "Come to see me, gossip! Come, my dear, you'll see how nicely I'll entertain you!" So the crane came to her house. Meantime the fox had cooked gruel and spread it over a dish. She served it and urged her guest: "Eat, my darling, I cooked it myself." The crane pecked with his bill, knocked and knocked at the dish, but nothing got into his mouth, while the fox lapped and lapped the gruel until she had eaten it all. After the gruel was gone, the fox said: "I'm sorry, dear friend, but that's all I have to offer you." "Thank you, my friend, for what you have given me. You must come to visit me soon." 
 The next day the fox came to the crane's house. The crane 
 
 Bad made a soup and put it in a pitcher with a narrow neck. She placed it on the table and said: "Eat, my friend, that's all I have to offer you." The fox began to trot around the pitcher, she approached it from one side, then from another, she licked it and smelled it, but all to no avail. Her snout could not get into the pitcher. Meanwhile the crane sucked and sucked until he had drunk all the soup. "I am sorry, my friend, that's all I have to offer you." The fox was greatly vexed; for she had thought she would eat for a whole week, and now she had to go home with a long face and an empty stomach. It was tit for tat; and from that moment on the friendship between the fox and the crane was over. 
 
