 NEAR the shore of an island in the ocean stood a small, dilapidated hut; in this hut lived an old man and his wife. They lived in dire poverty. The old man made himself a net and began to catch fish in the sea, for that was his only means of livelihood. One day the old man cast his net and 
 
 began to pull on it; it seemed to him heavier than it had ever been before-he could barely drag it out. He looked, and the net was empty; there was only one fish in it. It was not an ordinary fish, but a goldfish. The goldfish implored him in a human voice: "Do not take me, old man. Let me go back into the blue sea; I will return your kindness by doing whatever you wish." The old man thought and thought and said: "I do not want anything of you; go back to the sea!" He threw the goldfish into the water and returned home. His wife asked him: "Did you get a big catch, old man?" "Only one little goldfish," the old man replied, "and even that I threw back into the sea-it implored me so earnestly, saying, 'Let me go back into the blue sea, and I will return your kindness by doing whatever you wish.' I took pity on the little fish, I did not demand anything of it but let it go free, for nothing." "Ah, you old devil!" said his wife. "You had a great chance but did not know how to take advantage of it." 
 The old woman became full of spite, abused her husband from dawn to dark, and did not give him a minute's rest. "At least you should have asked for some bread! Soon we won't even have a dry crust. What will you eat then?" The old man could not bear it any longer and went to the goldfish to ask for bread. He came to the sea and cried in a loud voice: "Goldfish, goldfish, stand with your tail to the sea, and your head to me!" The goldfish came to the shore. "What do you want, old man?" he asked. "My wife is furious at me, she sent me to you to get some bread." "Go home, you will find plenty of bread." The old man returned. "Well, wife, do we have plenty of bread?" he asked her. "We have plenty of bread, but we have this trouble: our trough broke, I have nothing to do my washing in. Go to the goldfish and ask him to give us a new trough." The old man went to the sea, and said: "Goldfish, goldfish, stand with your tail to the sea, and your head to me!" The goldfish came, saying: "What do you want, old man?" "My wife sent me to ask you for a new trough." "Very well, you will have a new trough." The old man returned and as soon as he crossed the threshold his wife again beset him. "Go to the goldfish," 
 
 
 
 she said, "ask him to build us a new house; it is impossible to live in this one-any minute, it may fall apart." 
 The old man went to the sea. "Goldfish, goldfish," he said, "stand with your tail to the sea, and your head to me!" The fish came, stood with his head to the old man, and his tail to the sea, and asked: "What do you want, old man?" "Build us a new house. My wife scolds me and does not give me any rest. 'I don't want to live in this old hut,' she says, 'it may fall apart any minute.' " "Grieve not, old man, go home and pray to God: everything will be done." The old man returned, and on his plot stood a new oaken house, richly carved. His wife ran out to meet him; she was even angrier than before and abused him roundly. "You old dog, you don't know how to take advantage of your luck. Just because you have got a new house, you think you have accomplished something! Now, go back to the goldfish and say to it that I don't want to be a peasant-I want to be a governor, so that law-abiding men will obey me and bow from their waists when they meet me." 
 The old man went to the sea and said in a loud voice: "Gold- 
 
 fish, goldfish, stand with your tail to the sea, and your head to me!" The goldfish came, stood with its tail to the sea, and its head to him. "What do you want, old man?" he asked. The old man answered: "My wife gives me no peace, she has become quite foolish; she does not want to be a peasant woman, she wants to be a governor." "Very well, grieve not, go home and pray to God: everything will be done." The old man returned, and instead of a wooden house there was a stone house of three stories; servants ran about in the courtyard, cooks bustled in the kitchen, and the old woman, dressed in rich brocade, sat on a high-backed chair and gave orders. "Good day, wife," said the old man. "You boor, how dare you call me, the governor, your wife? Hey there, you servants! Take this peasant to the stable and whip him as hard as you can!" 
 The servants ran up, seized the old man by his collar, and dragged him to the stable, and there the stable boys began to thrash him with whips; they thrashed him so hard that he could barely stand on his feet. Then the old woman appointed the old man to be her janitor; she ordered a broom to be given him to sweep the yard, and he had to eat and drink in the kitchen. The old man led a miserable life. All day long he had to clean the yard; if any dirt was discovered, he was led to the stable. "What a witch!" thought the old man. "She has found a comfortable hole and dug herself in like a sow; she does not even consider me her husband any longer." 
 Some time passed; the old woman became weary of being governor, summoned the old man before her, and ordered: "Go to the goldfish, old devil, and tell him that I don't want to be a governor, I want to be a queen." The old man went to the sea and said: "Goldfish, goldfish, stand with your tail to the sea, and your head to me!" The goldfish came. "What do you want, old man?" he asked. "My wife has become even more foolish," the old man answered. "She no longer wants to be a governor, she wants to be a queen." "Grieve not, go home and pray to God: everything will be done." The old man returned, and instead of the house he found a lofty castle with a golden roof; around it sentries walked and presented arms. Behind the castle was a large garden, and in front of it was a green 
 
 meadow; in the meadow troops were gathered. The old woman was dressed like a queen; she came out on the balcony with generals and boyars and began to review the troops. The drums thundered, the band played, the soldiers cried "Hurrah!" 
 After some time the old woman became weary of being a queen; she ordered the old man to be found and brought into her august presence. A tumult arose, the generals bustled about, the boyars ran everywhere. "What old man?" they asked. At long last he was found in the backyard and led before the queen. "Listen, you old devil," she said to him. "Go to the goldfish and say to him that I don't want to be a queen. I want to be the ruler of the sea, so that all the seas and all the fishes will obey me." The old man tried to refuse, but in vain. "If you do not go," she said, "your head will roll." 
 Taking his courage in his hands the old man went to the sea. When he came there he said: "Goldfish, goldfish, stand with your tail to the sea, and your head to me!" The goldfish did not come. The old man called a second time-still the goldfish did not come. He called a third time, and suddenly the sea began to roll and roar; it had been bright and clear a moment before but now it grew quite black. The fish came to the shore. "What do you want, old man?" he asked. "My wife has become even more foolish. She no longer wants to be a queen, she wants to be the ruler of the sea, to rule over all the waters and command all the fishes." The goldfish did not say anything to the old man but turned around and went down to the depths of the sea. The old man returned home, and when he looked, he could not believe his eyes. The castle was gone as though it had never been there, and in its place stood a small, dilapidated hut, and in the hut sat his wife in a ragged dress. They began to live as before. The old man again took to catching fish; but no matter how often he cast his net into the sea, he never could catch the goldfish again. 
 


