 There were once a husband and a wife who seemed to live well. But the wife was an ingenious woman; when the husband went away, she was merry, when he came back she fell ill; she always tried to find work for him to do, to get rid of him; one day she would send him hither, the next day thither, and while he was away she would give little parties and feasts. Her husband would return, find everything clean and in order, and his wife aching and groaning and lying on the bench. The husband believed that she was ill and for his part almost wept. One day she conceived the idea of sending him to get a medicine in Krimgrad. The husband went. On the way he met a soldier, who asked: "Whither are you going, peasant?" "To Krimgrad to get a medicine." "Who is sick?" "My wife." "Go back, go back without fail; I am an expert healer myself, I will go with you." Then he commanded: "Left, turn!" Soon they found themselves near the peasant's barn. "Have your wife sit up," said the expert. "I will find out how sick she is." 
 The husband entered the courtyard, put his ear to the door, and heard sounds of games, dances, and merriment. The soldier's heart boiled, he struck the door, and it opened. The wife was moving about like a swan, a young fellow capered 
 
 in front of her, green wine was flowing on the table. The soldier came just in time; he drank a cup of wine and began to cut capers. The wife found him to her liking. What a soldier, what a handsome fellow-and so keen, so clever, as though he had lived there all his life! Yes, tomorrow there would be cakes to bake. "Soldier," she said, "go to the barn, bring a bundle of straw." 
 The soldier went, gathered the straw, wrapped the husband in it, tied it with a rope, slung it over his shoulders, and brought it to the wife. She was glad and intoned a song: "The husband went to Krimgrad, to buy healing herbs, to cure the wife's belly with plants. He will never get there, he will never come back. Hey, soldier, accompany me!" The soldier began his song: "Do you hear, straw, what's going on here?" "Oh, your song is no good, mine is better. Let us sing it together! The husband went to Krimgrad, to buy healing herbs, to cure the wife's belly with plants." She sang loudly, and the soldier sang even more loudly: "Do you hear, straw, what's going on here? The whip is hanging on the wall, and it should be on a back!" The straw heard and wriggled; the rope burst, the husband jumped out, snatched the whip, and began to belabor his wife. He cured her in no time. 
