
 IN A certain land, in a certain kingdom, there lived an old man and his old wife. They had three sons, of whom the third was called Ivan the Simpleton. The first two sons were married, but Ivan the Simpleton was a bachelor. The first two were busy: they managed the house, plowed, and sowed, but the third did nothing at all. One day the old father and his daughters-in-law sent Ivan to finish plowing a few rods of land. The young boy came to the field, harnessed his horse, drove once or twice over the field with his plow, and saw countless swarms of mosquitoes and midges. He grabbed a whip, lashed one side of his horse, and killed a host of these bugs; he lashed the other side of his horse and killed forty gadflies. He thought to himself: "Here with one stroke I have killed forty mighty knights and a countless host of lesser warriors!" He gathered them all together, put them in a pile, and covered them with horse dung; he did not continue plowing, but unharnessed his horse and drove home. Upon his return he said to his sisters-in-law and his mother: "Give me a piece of thick cloth and a saddle, and you, father, give me the rusty saber that hangs on the wall. I am not a real peasant, I have no land!" 
 His family laughed at him, and to mock him gave him a cracked clod instead of a saddle; our fellow attached girths to it and laid it across a wretched mare. Instead of a piece of thick cloth, his mother gave him a ragged old dress of hers; he took this, sharpened his father's saber, made ready for his journey, and left. He came to a crossroads, and since he knew how to write a little, he wrote on the guidepost: "Let the mighty Ilya Muromets and Fyodor Lyzhnikov come to such and such a kingdom to see the strong and mighty hero who in one stroke killed forty mighty knights and an unnumbered host of lesser warriors, and covered them all with a stone." 
 Soon after him, Ilya Muromets came to the same crossroads and read the inscription on the post. "Ha!" he said. "A strong and mighty hero has passed by here; it is not meet to disobey 
 
 him." He rode on and overtook Vaniukha, and while he was still at a distance, doffed his cap and saluted him: "Good day, strong and mighty hero!" Vaniukha did not doff his cap, and said: "Good day, Iliukha!" They rode together. After a short time Fyodor Lyzhnikov came to the same post, read the inscription, and decided that he too should heed the summons-after all, Ilya Muromets had heeded it! So he rode in the same direction; while he was still at a distance he doffed his cap and said: "Good day, strong and mighty hero!" But Vaniukha did not doff his cap, and said: "Good day, Fediunka!" 
 All three of them rode together; they came to a certain kingdom, and stopped in the royal meadows. The heroes pitched their tents, and Vaniukha spread his old dress; the two heroes tied their steeds with silken ropes, but Vaniukha broke a twig from a tree, twisted it, and tied his mare with it. And so they settled themselves. From his castle the king saw that strangers were foraging in his meadows and at once sent one of his familiars to find out who they were. He came to the meadows, approached Ilya Muromets, and asked him what manner of men they were and why they thus trampled the king's meadows without permission. Ilya Muromets answered: "It is not for me to answer! Ask our chief, the strong and mighty hero." 
 The envoy approached Vaniukha, who began to shout at him before he could utter a word: "Get away while you still can, and tell the king that in his meadows there is a strong and mighty hero who in one stroke killed forty mighty knights and an unnumbered host of lesser warriors and covered them with a stone-and that Ilya Muromets and Fyodor Lyzhnikov are with him, and that he demands the king's daughter in marriage!" The envoy conveyed this message to the king. The king consulted the annals: Ilya Muromets and Fyodor Lyzhnikov were mentioned there, but the third one, who in one stroke had killed forty knights, was not. Then the king ordered his army to gather, seize the three knights, and bring them before him. But this was no easy task! When Vaniukha saw the army approaching he cried: "Ilyukha, drive away this rabble!" And he himself lay down, stretched out, and watched the scene like an owl. 
 
 At his command Ilya Muromets jumped on his steed, galloped forward, and did not so much smite with his hands as trample with his steed; he knocked down the whole army, leaving only a few messengers to inform the king of what had happened. Upon hearing the news of the disaster, the king assembled even greater forces and sent them to seize the three knights. Ivan the Simpleton cried: "Fediunka, drive away this scum!" Fyodor jumped on his steed and knocked them all down, leaving only a few messengers. 
 What could the king do? He was in sore straits; the three knights had defeated his army. He began to cudgel his brains, and recalled that in his kingdom there lived a strong hero, Dobrynya. He sent him a letter, asking him to come to the royal meadows and conquer the three knights. Dobrynya came; the king received him on his third-story balcony, and Dobrynya on horseback was level with the king on the balcony-so mighty was he! He saluted the king and they spoke together. Then he went to the king's meadows. Ilya Muromets and Fyodor Lyzhnikov saw Dobrynya riding toward them, became frightened, jumped on their steeds, and made away. But Vaniukha had no time to run away, for while he got his mare ready, Dobrynya approached him and began to laugh at the sight of this vaunted hero-he was so short and so thin! Dobrynya bent his head down level with Vaniukha's face and stared at him in amusement. Vaniukha did not lose his presence of mind; he drew out his saber and cut off Dobrynya's head. 
 The king saw this and was frightened. "Oh," he said, "the knight has slain Dobrynya. Now we are indeed in trouble! Go quickly, call the hero to my palace." Such a brilliant delegation came to fetch Vaniukha that, Lord save us, the very best carriages and people of the highest rank were there. They seated him in a coach and brought him before the king. The king received him hospitably and gave him his daughter in marriage; they celebrated their wedding, and are still alive to this very day and chewing bread. 
 I was at their wedding and drank mead; it ran down my mustache but did not go into my mouth. I asked for a cap, 
 
 and received a slap; I was given a robe, and on my way home a titmouse flew over me cackling: "Flowing robe!" I thought she was saying, "Throw away the robe," and threw it away. This is not the tale, but a flourish, for fun. The tale itself has not begun! 
 
