
 IN A certain village there lived a jester. A priest decided to visit him and said to his wife: "I think I will go to the jester, perhaps he will play some clever trick to amuse me." He made ready and went; he found the jester walking around his yard tending his farm. "May God help you, jester!" "Welcome, father, whither is God taking you?" "To you, my dearest one; won't you play a trick to amuse me?" "With pleasure, father; only I left the trick with seven other jesters, so dress me up warmly and give me your horse that I may go and fetch it." The priest gave him his horse, sheepskin, and cap, and the jester drove away. He came to the priest's wife and said: "Little mother, the priest has bought twelve thousand pounds of fish; he sent me to you on his horse, he wants three hundred rubles." The priest's wife straightway gave him three hundred rubles; the jester took them and drove back. He came home, put the sheepskin coat and the cap in the sledge, set the horse free in the enclosure, and hid himself. The priest waited and waited, finally lost patience, and returned to his wife. She asked: "Where is the fish?" "What fish?" "What do you mean? The jester was here to get the money; he said that you had bought twelve thousand pounds of fish, and I gave him three hundred rubles." Thus the priest learned what kind of trick the jester had played on him! 
 The next day he again went to the jester. The jester expected him; he had disguised himself as a woman and was sitting by the window spinning. Suddenly the priest appeared. "May God help you!" "You are welcome!" "Is the jester home?" "No, father." "But where is he?" "Yesterday he played a trick on you, and since then he has not been home." "What a rascal! He will probably come home tomorrow." On the third day the priest came again, and the jester still was not at home. The priest thought: "Why should I come here for nothing? This girl is probably his sister; I will take her to my house and make her work off my money." He asked her: "Who are you? A relation of the jester's?" She said: "I am his sister." "The jester took three hundred rubles from me; so come, my little dove, work them off." "Well, if I must go, I will." She made ready, went with the priest, and lived in his house for a long time. 
 The priest had several young daughters to marry. One day the matchmakers came to him: a rich merchant wanted to marry his son to one of the priest's daughters. But the priest's daughters were not to the merchant's liking, and instead he asked the priest's cook, the jester's pretended sister, to marry his son. There was a gay feast and a wedding, everything was done in the proper way. That evening the pretended bride said to her husband: "Drop me out of the window on a sheet, I want to get some fresh air; when I shake the sheet, pull me back." The husband dropped her into the garden; the supposed wife tied a she-goat to the sheet, shook it, and the bridegroom pulled it back. When he dragged it into the room, he found a she-goat instead of his wife. He began to shout: "Oh, evil people have bewitched my wife!" Everyone rushed to his room and began to exorcise the she-goat; the women began to conjure her, trying to turn her into a woman again, and in the end tormented her so much that she died. 
 Meanwhile the jester came home, changed his clothing, and went to the priest, who welcomed him and invited him to stay and dine with him. The jester ate and drank, talked about one thing and another, and then asked: "Father, where is my sister? Did you not take her into your home?" "I did," answered the priest, "but I married her to a rich merchant." "What do you mean? Without my permission? Does the law permit that? I'll sue you in court!" The priest began to argue with him, begging him not to sue. The jester obtained three hundred rubles from him. Then he said: "Now, father, take me to my brother-in-law, show me how they are living." The priest did not want to start a new argument, so he went with him. 
 They came to the merchant, who received them hospitably. The jester sat there for a long time, but his sister did not appear. Finally he said: "Kinsman, where is my sister? I have not seen her for a long time." The others began to get restless. He asked again; they told him that evil people had bewitched his 
 
 sister and changed her into a she-goat. "Show me the goat, then!" said the jester. They said: "She died." "No! No she-goat died-you killed my sister. How could she change into a goat? I will go to court about this." They began to beg him: "Please don't go to court, we'll pay you whatever you ask." "Give me three hundred rubles, then I won't sue you." They counted out the money, the jester took it and left, made a coffin somewhere, put the money in it, and drove home. 
 On his way he met the seven other jesters. They asked him: "What are you carrying, jester?" "Money." "And where did you get it?" "It's very simple! I sold a dead man, and now I am carrying his coffin full of money." The jesters without saying a word went home, slew their wives, made coffins, put the coffins on carts, and drove into town, calling: "Dead people, dead people! Who wants to buy dead people!" When the Cossacks heard this, they immediately galloped over to them and began to lash them with whips. They lashed them for a long time, saying: "That will teach you to sell dead people!" Then they drove them out of the town. The seven jesters had a narrow escape; they buried their dead and went to the first jester's house to revenge themselves for the trick he had played on them. He was expecting them and had prepared everything in advance. 
 They came, entered his house, wished him good day, and sat down on a bench. Now, there was a she-goat running about in the jester's house; she ran and ran and suddenly dropped a silver ruble. The jesters saw it and asked: "How did the she-goat drop a silver ruble?" "She always drops silver coins!" They began to press him to sell the goat; he stubbornly refused, arguing that he wanted her himself. But the other jesters insisted and finally he agreed to sell the goat for three hundred rubles. The jesters gave him the money and took the goat away with them; they put her in a room, spread rugs on the floor, and waited for the morning, thinking, "She'll drop a tubful of coins for us!" Instead she only befouled the rugs. 
 Again the jesters went to take vengeance on our jester. He knew that they would come and said to his wife: "Now woman, mind you. I am going to fasten a bladder full of blood under your arm. When the jesters come to thrash me, I shall ask you 
 
 to serve dinner. The first time I ask you, don't heed me; the second time I ask you, still don't heed me; the third time I ask you, still don't heed me. I will snatch a knife and thrust it into the bladder, the blood will flow, and you will fall, pretending that you are dead. Then I will take a whiplash and lash you once; you will stir. I will lash you a second time, and you will turn over; I will lash you a third time, and you will jump up and set the table." The jesters arrived. "Well, brother," they said, "you have been cheating us long enough. This time we are going to kill you." "Too bad! Kill me if you must, but let us have dinner together for the last time. Eh, woman, serve the dinner!" She did not move; he ordered her a second time and still she did not move; he ordered her a third time and still she did not move. The jester took a knife and slashed her in the side; blood flowed from her in streams, she fell to the floor, and the jesters became frightened. "What have you done, you dog? Now you'll get us involved in this!" "Quiet, boys! I have a special whiplash with which to cure her." 
 He got the whiplash, lashed once, and his wife stirred; he lashed a second time and she turned over; he lashed a third time and she jumped up and began to set the table. The jesters said: "Sell us that whiplash!" "Buy it." "How much do you want for it?" "Three hundred rubles." The jesters counted out the money, took the whiplash, and went to town with it. They saw a rich man's funeral and cried: "Stop, stop!" The procession stopped. "We shall bring the dead man back to life." They lashed the dead man once, but he did not stir; they lashed him a second time, with the same result; they lashed him a third, fourth, and fifth time-still the dead man refused to stir. Then the good fellows were seized and given lashes in their turn; and the people who lashed them with whips kept saying: "That's for you doctors! That's for you doctors!" This time they were lashed till they were half dead. They somehow managed to trudge home, and when they had recovered they said: "Well, boys, the jester has made fools of us long enough; let us kill him once and for all." 
 They made ready and went; they found the jester at home, seized him, and dragged him to the river to drown him. He 
 
 begged them: "Please let me at least say farewell to my wife and family. Bring them here!" They agreed, and went to get his family, after tying him in a sack and leaving him near the ice hole. They had no sooner left than a soldier drove by with a pair of bay horses. The jester coughed in his sack. The soldier stopped, got off his sledge, and asked: "Ah, jester, why have you crept into this sack?" "Well, I eloped with so and so [he named the girl], and her father began to look for us; we hid in sacks, and had ourselves tied up and set down in different places in order to mislead our pursuers." The soldier was a widower and he said: "Brother, let me get into that sack." The jester obstinately refused, but the soldier pressed him and finally persuaded him. The jester got out, tied the soldier in the sack, took his horses, and drove away. The soldier sat and sat in the sack and finally fell asleep. 
 The seven jesters returned without our jester's family, took the sack, and cast it into the water; the sack went down to the bottom and the water made a gurgling noise that sounded like "gray-glack-gray-glack." The jesters ran home, sat down to rest, and our jester drove by their windows with a pair of horses fine enough to take your breath away! "Stop!" shouted the seven jesters. He stopped. "How did you get out of the water?" "Ah, you fools! Didn't you hear me saying as I went down: 'Grays and blacks, grays and blacks'? I was fishing for horses. There are plenty of them, and what horses! What I have harnessed here is just trash, because they were near the shore, but a little farther out there are black horses-real prizes!" The jesters believed him and begged: "Brother, drop us into the water- we too want to get some horses!" "With pleasure!" He tied them all in sacks and dropped them into the water, one after the other. When he had dropped them all, he just waved his hand and said: "Now drive out on your black horses!" 
 

