
 IN a certain village there was a maiden, a lazybones and idler who did not like to work but only to chatter and gossip. One day she decided to invite some girls to spin in her house. As is well known, in the villages lazybones always invite girls to spin in their houses, and a girl with a sweet tooth is always glad to be invited. So the Lazybones gathered spinners for a night; they spun for her and she fed and entertained them. Little by little the conversation began to turn on the subject of who of them was the boldest. Lazybones said: "I am not afraid of anything!" "If you don't fear anything," said the spinners, "go to the church, past the graveyard, take the icon 
 
 from the gate, and bring it here." "I will, but in the meantime let every one of you spin a measure of yarn for me." She never missed an opportunity to do nothing herself and to let others work for her. So she went, took down the icon, and brought it back to them. Well, the other girls saw that it really was the icon from the church. Now the icon had to be taken back, and midnight was drawing near. Who would take it? The Lazybones said: "You, girls, spin; I will take it back myself, I am not afraid of anything." 
 She went and put the icon back in its place. As she walked back past the graveyard she beheld a corpse in a white shroud sitting on a grave. It was a moonlit night, everything was clearly visible. She came close to the corpse and dragged off his shroud; the corpse did not say anything; he was silent, apparently the time had not come for him to speak. So she took the shroud and came home. "Well," she said, "I took back the icon and put it in its place, and I also pulled a shroud off a corpse." Some of the girls were frightened, others refused to believe it and giggled. As soon as they had eaten supper and gone to bed, the corpse suddenly knocked at the window and said: "Give me back my shroud! Give me back my shroud!" The other girls were half dead with fright, but Lazybones took the shroud, went to the window, and opened it. "There it is!" she said. "Take it." "No," said the corpse, "bring it back whence you took it." Suddenly the cocks began to crow and the corpse vanished. 
 The next night all the spinners had gone to their homes; and at the same hour the corpse came again and knocked at the window. "Give me back my shroud," he said. Lazybones' father and mother opened the window and handed him the shroud. "No," he said, "let her bring it back whence she took it." But how could one go with a corpse to the graveyard? It was frightening! As soon as the cocks crowed the corpse vanished. 
 Next day the father and mother sent for the priest, told him everything, and asked him for help in their trouble. "Could you not," they said, "celebrate a mass?" The priest thought for a while and said: "That might be good! Tell her to come to mass tomorrow." Next morning Lazybones went to mass; the 
 
 service began, and there was a great crowd of people. The moment they began to sing the Gloria in Excelsis a terrible whirlwind arose, and everyone fell face down on the ground. The wind seized the girl and threw her down too. In a trice she disappeared completely; only her braid remained. 

