
 There was once an old man who lived with his wife. He said to her: "Woman, do you bake cakes, while I go fishing." He caught fish and carried home a whole cartful of them. As he drove along, he spied a fox lying wound up like a cracknel on the road. The old man got down from his cart and came close to the fox, but she did not stir; she lay like one dead. "This will be a gift for my wife," said the old man, and he took the fox, and put her in the cart, and he himself walked in front of it. The fox chose the right moment and began quietly to throw one fish after the other out of the cart. She threw out all the fish and then ran away. "Well, old woman," said the old man, "I have brought you a fine collar for your fur coat." "Where?" "There in the cart you will find both the fish and the collar." The woman went to the cart and found neither collar nor fish. She began to abuse her husband: "Ah, you old dotard, you fool! You want to cheat me!" Only then did the old man realize that the fox was not dead; he grieved and grieved, but there was nothing that he could do. 
 
 Meanwhile the fox gathered up in a pile all the fish scattered on the road, sat down, and began to eat them. A wolf came by and said: "Good day, neighbor!" "Good day, neighbor," answered the fox. "Give me some fish," said the wolf. "Catch it yourself, then you can eat." "But I don't know how." "Eh, I did it. All you have to do, neighbor, is to go to the river and drop your tail into a hole in the ice; the fish will hook themselves to your tail. But sit for a long time, else you won't catch enough." The wolf went to the river and dropped his tail into a hole in the ice, for it was wintertime. He sat and sat; he sat through the night, and his tail was frozen in; he tried to raise himself, but could not. "Eh," he thought, "so much fish has got hooked to my tail that I cannot pull it out!" Suddenly he saw women coming to fetch water. Seeing the gray wolf, they began to cry: "A wolf, a wolf! Hit him, hit him!" They ran up to him and began to belabor him, some with cowlstaffs, some with pails, others with whatever they had in hand. The wolf jumped and jumped, tore off his tail, and took to his heels without looking back. "I'll remember that, neighbor," he thought. "I'll pay you back in kind!" 
 Meanwhile Little Sister Fox, having eaten enough fish, decided to see whether she could not steal something else. She got into a house where women were frying pancakes, stuck her head into a tub of dough, smeared herself, and ran away. The wolf met her. "So that's the way you teach me?" he said. "I was roundly beaten for my pains." "Eh, neighbor," said Little Sister Fox, "all you have lost is some blood. But I have had my brains beaten out of me, and it was much more painful; I can hardly hobble along." "That's true," said the wolf. "How can you walk in this condition? Better sit on me, I will carry you home." The fox sat on his back and he carried her. Little Sister Fox, while sitting on the wolf's back, began to whisper: "The beaten one is carrying the unbeaten one, the beaten one is carrying the unbeaten one." "What are you saying, neighbor?" "I am saying, the beaten one is carrying the beaten one." "Very true, neighbor, very true." 
 "Now, neighbor, let's build huts for ourselves," said the fox. 
 
 "Let's, neighbor." "I will build myself a but of linden bark, and you build yourself one of ice." They set to work, and built huts for themselves, one of linden bark for the fox and one of ice for the wolf, and lived in them. Spring came and the wolf's hut melted away. "Ah, neighbor," said the wolf, "you have cheated me again; for that I must eat you up." "Come, neighbor, we will make a trial to see who will eat whom." Little Sister Fox took him to a woods near a deep pit and said: "Jump! If you jump across this pit, you shall eat me; if not, I will eat you." The wolf jumped and fell into the pit. "Well," said the fox, "sit there!" And she went away. 
 She walked along carrying a rolling pin in her paw and asked a peasant to give her shelter in his house. "Let Little Sister Fox spend the night with you," she said. "We are crowded even without you," said the peasant. "I won't disturb you; I'll lie on the bench and put my tail under it and the rolling pin under the stove." She was allowed to come in. She lay on the bench with her tail under it and put the rolling pin under the stove. Early next morning she got up, burned her rolling pin, and then asked: "Where is my rolling pin? I would not take even a goose for it!" The peasant had no choice but to give her a goose for the lost rolling pin. The fox took the goose and walked away singing: 
 Little Sister Fox Walked on the road Carrying a rolling pin And swapped it for a goose. 
 Knock, knock, knock! She knocked at another peasant's door. "Who's there?" the peasant called out. "I, Little Sister Fox. Please give me shelter for the night." "We are crowded even without you." "I won't disturb you; I'll lie on the bench and put my tail under it and the goose under the stove." She was allowed to come in. She lay on the bench with her tail under the bench and put the goose under the stove. Early next morning she got up, took her goose, plucked it and ate it, and said: "Where is my goose? I would not take even a turkey for 
 
 it!" The peasant had no choice but to give her a turkey. She took it and walked away singing: 
 Little Sister Fox Walked on the road Carrying a rolling pin; She swapped it for a goose, And the goose for a turkey. 
 Knock, knock, knock! She knocked at the door of a third peasant. "Who's there?" the peasant called out. "I, Little Sister Fox. Please give me shelter for the night!" "We are crowded even without you." "I won't disturb you; I'll lie on the bench and put my tail under it and the turkey under the stove." She was allowed to come in. She lay on the bench with her tail under the bench and put the turkey under the stove. Early next morning she got up, took her turkey, plucked it and ate it, and 6aid: "Where is my turkey? I would not take even a maiden for it!" The peasant had no choice but to give her a maiden. The fox put her in a bag and walked away singing: 
 Little Sister Fox Walked on the road Carrying a rolling pin; She swapped it for a goose, The goose for a turkey, The turkey for a maiden! 
 Knock, knock, knock! She knocked at the door of a fourth peasant. "Who's there?" the peasant called out. "I, Little Sister Fox. Please give me shelter for the night!" "We are crowded even without you." "I won't disturb you; I'll lie on the bench and put my tail under the bench and my bag under the stove." She was allowed to come in. She lay on the bench with her tail under it and put her bag under the stove. The peasant quietly let the maiden out of the bag and shoved in his dog in place of her. Next morning Little Sister Fox made ready to go, took her bag, walked on the road, and said: "Maiden, 6ing me a song!" The dog began to howl. The fox took fright, flung away the bag with the dog in it, and took to her heels. 
 
 The fox ran and ran till she beheld a cock perched on a gate. She said to him: "Little cock, little cock, come down, I'll hear your confession-you have seventy wives, you have always been a sinner." The cock climbed down and she snatched him and gobbled him up. 
 
 
