
 IN A certain kingdom, in a certain land, there once lived a very wealthy merchant. He had an only daughter, Anastasya the Fair, who was only five years of age. The merchant's name was Marco, and his surname was "the Rich." He could not endure beggars; whenever they came begging at his window, he ordered his servants to drive them away and loose the dogs upon them. 
 One day two old gray-haired men came begging to his window. Marco saw them and ordered the dogs to be let loose upon them. Anastasya the Fair heard of it and began to implore her father: "My dear father, for my sake at least let them take shelter in the cattle shed!" The father consented and ordered the beggars to be led to the cattle shed. 
 When everyone in the house was asleep, Anastasya rose up and went to the cattle shed; she climbed up to the loft and watched the beggars. When it became time for matins, the candle beneath the icon lighted by itself; the old men rose up, took priestly vestments out of their bags, put them on, and began the service of matins. An angel of God came flying and said: "In such and such a village, a son is born to such and such a peasant; by what name shall he be called, and what shall be his fortune?" One of the old men said: "I give him the name of Vasily and the surname of "the Luckless," and I hereby present him with all the wealth of Marco the Rich, under whose roof we are now spending the night." Anastasya 
 
 heard all this. At daybreak, the old men made ready to go and left the cattle shed. Anastasya went to her father and told him everything that she had seen and heard there. 
 The father wondered whether the prophecy would come true and decided to see whether a babe had really been born in the village; he had his carriage harnessed, went straight to the priest of the village, and asked him: "Was a babe born in your village on such and such a day?" "Yes," said the priest, "a babe was born to our poorest peasant; I christened him Vasily and surnamed him 'the Luckless,' but I have not yet baptized him because no one wants to stand as godfather to the poor man's child." Marco offered to stand as godfather, asked the priest's wife to be godmother, and bade them prepare a rich repast; the little boy was brought to the church and baptized, and everyone feasted to his heart's content. 
 The next day Marco the Rich summoned the poor peasant to him, spoke kindly to him, and said: "Friend, you are a poor man, you won't be able to bring up your son; give him to me, I will help him to rise in the world, and I will give you a thousand rubles for your own maintenance." The poor man thought and thought and finally consented. Marco gave him the promised money, took the child, wrapped him in fox furs, put him in his carriage, and drove away. It was winter. Having driven several versts, Marco bade his coachman stop, handed him the godchild, and said: "Take him by the legs and hurl him into the ravine." The coachman did as he was ordered and hurled the child into a deep ravine. And Marco said: "Now, Vasily, take possession of my wealth!" 
 Two days later some merchants chanced to travel by the same road; they were carrying twelve thousand rubles that they owed to Marco the Rich. When they came near the ravine they heard the wailing of a child. They stopped, listened, and sent a servant to see who it could be. The servant went down into the ravine and beheld a green meadow; in the meadow a child sat, playing with flowers and whimpering. The servant told all this to his master, who went to the ravine himself, took the child, wrapped him in a fur coat, returned to his carriage, and drove on. The merchants came to Marco the Rich, who asked 
 
 them where they had found the child. They told him, and he guessed at once that it was Vasily the Luckless, his own godchild; he took the boy in his arms, held him for a while, and gave him to his daughter, saying: "Take him, my daughter, and nurse him." 
 Then he plied the merchants with all kinds of drink and asked them to let him keep the child. The merchants at first refused, but when Marco told them that he would cancel then-debt, they consented and left. Anastasya was so overjoyed that she immediately found a cradle, hung curtains around it, and began to tend the boy, not leaving him by night or by day. One day went by, then another; on the third day Marco came home late, when Anastasya was asleep, took the child, put him into a little barrel, tarred it, and threw it into the water of the port. 
 The barrel sailed and sailed, till finally it floated up to a monastery. A monk happened to be fetching water. He heard the wailing of a child; he looked about him and saw the barrel. He immediately took a boat, caught up the barrel, broke it open, and found the child. He brought the babe to his abbot. The abbot named the child Vasily and surnamed him "the Luckless." Vasily the Luckless lived in the monastery for sixteen years and learned how to read and write. The abbot loved him and made him his sacristan. 
 It came to pass that Marco the Rich was traveling to a foreign kingdom to collect debts owed to him and on his way stopped at the monastery. He was received as befits a rich man. The abbot ordered the sacristan to go to the church; he went, lighted the candles, and read and sang. Marco the Rich asked the abbot: "Has this young man been with you long?" The abbot told him how the boy had been found in a barrel, and when. Marco reckoned the time and realized that the sacristan was his godchild. He said to the abbot: "If I had an intelligent young man like your sacristan, I would appoint him chief clerk and put him in charge of all my treasure; could you not give him to me?" For a long time the abbot made excuses. Finally Marco offered him twenty-five thousand rubles for his monastery. The abbot consulted the brothers, and after long deliberation they consented to part with Vasily the Luckless. 
 
 Marco sent Vasily home and gave him a letter to his wife, which ran as follows: "Wife, when you receive this letter, take its bearer immediately to our soap works, and when you pass near the great boiling cauldron, push him in. Do not fail to do this; if you fail, I shall punish you severely, for this youth has evil designs on me." Vasily took the letter and went on his way. He met an old man who said: "Whither are you going, Vasily the Luckless?" Vasily said: "To the house of Marco the Rich, with a letter to his wife." "Show me this letter." Vasily took it out and gave it to the old man, who broke the seal and asked Vasily to read it. Vasily read it and burst into tears. "What have I done to this man," he said, "that he should send me to my death?" The old man said: "Do not grieve, God will not forsake you." Then he breathed on the letter and the seal resumed its former shape. "Go now," said the old man, "and give the letter to the wife of Marco the Rich." 
 Vasily came to the house of Marco the Rich and gave the letter to his wife. She read it, pondered deeply, then called her daughter Anastasya and read Marco's letter to her. This is what the letter now said: "Wife, one day after you receive this letter, marry Anastasya to the bearer. Do this without fail, otherwise you shall answer to me." In rich people's houses, beer does not have to be brewed nor wine distilled-everything is ready for a gay feast and a wedding. Vasily was dressed in rich garments, shown to Anastasya, and she found him to her liking. So they were wedded. 
 One day the wife of Marco the Rich was told that her husband had arrived in port, and accompanied by her son-in-law and daughter she went to meet him. Marco looked at his son-in-law, fell into a rage, and said to his wife: "How dared you to wed our daughter to him?" "By your command," answered his wife. Marco asked to see his letter, read it, and found that it was written in his hand. 
 Marco lived with his son-in-law for one month, a second, and a third. One day he summoned the young man before him and said to him: "Take this letter beyond thrice nine lands, to the thrice tenth kingdom, to my friend, King Dragon; collect from him rent for twelve years for a palace he built on my 
 
 land, and find out what has happened to twelve of my ships that have not been seen these three years. Set out on your way tomorrow morning." Vasily took the letter, went to his wife, and told her what Marco had commanded him to do. Anastasya wept bitterly but dared not ask her father to change his mind. 
 Early next morning Vasily prayed to God, took some biscuits in his knapsack, and set out. He walked on the road for a long time or a short time, a long way or a short; in any case, at one point he heard a voice at the side of the road saying: "Vasily the Luckless, whither are you going?" He looked around him on all sides and said: "Who is calling me?" "I, the oak, am asking you whither you are going." "I am going to King Dragon to collect rent for twelve years." The oak said: "If you arrive in time, remember to ask how much longer the oak must stand after standing for three hundred years." 
 Vasily listened carefully and continued on his journey. He came to a river and sat in the ferryboat. The old ferryman asked him: "Whither are you going, my friend?" Vasily told him what he had told the oak. And the ferryman requested him to ask the king how much longer he would have to ferry, for he had now been ferrying thirty years. "I shall ask him," said Vasily. He went on, reached the sea; a whale lay stretched out across the sea and people were walking and driving over her. When Vasily stepped on the whale, she said: "Vasily the Luckless, whither are you going?" Vasily told her what he had told the ferryman, and the whale said: "If you arrive in time, remember to ask how much longer I must lie here stretched across the sea, for people on foot and people on horseback have worn down my body to my very ribs." 
 Vasily promised to ask and went on. He came to a green meadow; in the meadow stood a huge palace. Vasily entered the palace and went from room to room; each was more splendid than the last. He went into the farthest room and found a lovely maiden sitting on the bed and weeping bitterly. When she saw Vasily, she rose up, approached him, and said: "Who are you and how did you happen to come to this accursed place?" Vasily showed her the letter and told her that Marco 
 
 the Rich had ordered him to collect rent for twelve years from King Dragon. The maiden threw the letter into the stove and said to Vasily: "You have been sent here not to collect rent, but as food for the dragon. But tell me, what roads did you take? Did you see or hear anything on your way here?" Vasily told her about the oak, the ferryman, and the whale. They had no sooner finished talking than the earth and the palace began to tremble; the maiden put Vasily into a chest under the bed and said to him: "Now listen to my conversation with the dragon." And saying this she went out to meet him. 
 When King Dragon entered the room, he said: "Why is there a Russian smell here?" The maiden said: "How could a Russian smell get here? You have been flying over Russia and the Russian smell is in your nostrils." The dragon said: "I am terribly exhausted. Pick the lice in my head." And he lay down on the bed. The maiden said to him: "King, what a dream I had while you were away! I was going along a road, and an oak cried to me: 'Ask the King how long I must stand here!' " "It will stand," said the King, "until someone comes to it and kicks it with his foot; then it will be uprooted and will fall, and beneath it there is an enormous amount of gold and silver-Marco the Rich does not have as much!" 
 The maiden went on: "And then I dreamed that I came to a river and the ferryman asked me how long he would have to ferry." "Let him put on the ferryboat the first man who comes to him, and push the boat away from the shore-and this man will ferry forever, and the ferryman will go home." "And then I dreamed that I walked across the sea on a whale, and she asked me how long she would have to lie there." "She shall lie there till she vomits up the twelve ships of Marco the Rich; then she will go down into the water and her body will grow again." When King Dragon had said this he fell sound asleep. 
 The maiden let Vasily out of the chest and advised him thus: "Do not tell the whale that she must vomit up the twelve ships of Marco the Rich, until you have crossed to the other side. Likewise, when you come to the ferryman, do not tell him what you have heard, until you have crossed. And when you come to the oak, kick it toward the east, and you will discover countless riches." Vasily the Luckless thanked the maiden and went away. 
 He came to the whale and she asked: "Did he say anything about me?" "He did; as soon as I cross I shall tell you." When Vasily had crossed over he said: "Vomit up the twelve ships of Marco the Rich." The whale vomited up the ships and they sailed forth, wholly unscathed; and Vasily the Luckless found himself in water up to his knees. Then he came to the ferryman, who asked: "Did you speak about me to King Dragon?" "I did," said Vasily, "but first ferry me over." When he had crossed over, he said to the ferryman: "Whoever comes to you first, put him on the ferryboat and push it away from the shore; he will ferry forever, and you will go home." 
 Vasily the Luckless came to the oak, kicked it with his foot, and the oak fell; beneath it he found gold and silver and precious stones without number. Vasily looked back and lo and behold, the twelve ships that had been thrown up by the whale were sailing straight to shore. And the ships were commanded by the same old man whom Vasily had met when he was carrying the letter of Marco the Rich to his wife. The old man said to Vasily: "This, Vasily, is what the Lord has blessed you with." Then he got off his ship and went on his way. 
 The sailors transported the gold and silver to the ships and then set out with Vasily the Luckless. Marco the Rich was told that his son-in-law was coming with twelve ships and that King Dragon had rewarded him with countless riches. 
 Marco grew furious that what he desired had not come to pass. He had his carriage harnessed and set out to drive to King Dragon's palace and upbraid him. He came to the ferryman and sat in the ferryboat; the ferryman pushed it away from the shore, and Marco remained to ferry forever. But Vasily the Luckless came home to his wife and mother-in-law, began to live with them and gain wealth, helped the poor, gave food and drink to beggars, and took possession of all the wealth of Marco the Rich. 
 

