 IN A certain land, not in our kingdom, there lived a king who had a son named Ivan and a daughter named Elena the Fair. A bear with iron fur appeared in this kingdom and began to eat the king's subjects. The bear ate one person after another and the king sat powerless and wondered how he could save his own children. He ordered a high tower to be built, seated Prince Ivan and Elena the Fair on top of it, and provided them with supplies for five years. 
 The bear ate up all the people, ran into the royal palace, and out of spite began to gnaw a birch broom. "Do not bite me, bear with iron fur," the broom said to him. "Instead, go out into the open; there you will see a tower, and on that tower sit Prince Ivan and Elena the Fair." The bear came to the tower and began to shake it. Prince Ivan took fright and threw him some food; the bear ate it and lay down to sleep. 
 The bear slept, and Prince Ivan and Elena the Fair ran away as fast as they could. On the road they met a horse. "Horse, horse, save us!" they cried. But no sooner had they mounted the horse than the bear caught up with them. He tore the horse to pieces, took the prince and princess in his jaws, and brought them back to the pillar. They gave him food; he ate it, and again he went to sleep. The bear slept, and Prince Ivan and Elena the Fair ran away as fast as they could. On the way they met some geese. "Geese, geese, save us!" they cried. They sat on the geese and flew off, but the bear awoke, singed the geese with a flame, and brought the prince and the princess back to the pillar. Again they gave him food; he ate it, and again he fell asleep. The bear slept, and Prince Ivan and Elena the Fair ran away as fast as they could. On the road stood a three-year-old bullock. "Bullock, bullock, save us! The bear with iron fur is pursuing us!" "Sit on me," said the bullock. "You, Prince Ivan, sit with your back to my head, and when you see the bear coming, tell me." As soon as the bear caught up with them, the bullock relieved himself and pasted the bear's eyes shut with 
 
 dung. Three times the bear caught up with them, and three times the bullock pasted his eyes shut. Then the bullock began to cross a river; the bear went into the water after him and drowned. 
 Ivan and Elena were hungry and the bullock said to them: "Slaughter me and eat my flesh, but gather my bones together and strike them; from them will arise a little fist of a man, as big as an inch, with a beard a cubit long. He will do everything for you that needs to be done." Time went by. They had eaten the bullock and again wanted to eat; they lightly struck the bones and the little fist of a man appeared. They went to the woods; in the woods stood a house and that house was a robbers' lair. Little Fist killed the robbers and their chieftain and put their bodies in a certain room; he told Elena not to go there. But she could not restrain herself, looked in, and fell in love with the chieftain's head. 
 She asked Prince Ivan to get for her the water of life and the water of death. As soon as she had the water of life and the water of death, she brought the chieftain back to life and plotted with him how to destroy Prince Ivan. First they sent him to get wolf's- milk. Prince Ivan went with Little Fist. They found the she-wolf and said to her: "Give us some milk." She asked them to take her wolf cub too, because he was a good-for-nothing. Having taken the milk and the young wolf, they came back to Elena the Fair; they gave her the milk and kept the young wolf for themselves. Since the lovers had not been able to destroy Prince Ivan in this way, they sent him to get bear's milk. Prince Ivan and Little Fist went to get bear's milk. They found the she-bear and said: "Give us some milk." She asked them to take the young bear too, because he was a good-for-nothing. Taking the milk and the young bear, they came back to Elena the Fair; they gave her the milk and kept the young bear. Since the lovers had not been able to destroy Prince Ivan in this way either, they sent him to get lion's milk. Prince Ivan went with Little Fist; they found the lioness and took her milk, and she asked them to take her lion cub too, because he was a good-for-nothing. They returned to Elena the Fair, gave her the milk, and kept the young lion. 
 
 The chieftain and Elena the Fair, seeing that Prince Ivan could not be destroyed in this way, sent him to get the eggs of the Firebird. Prince Ivan and Little Fist went to get the eggs. They found the Firebird, but when they tried to take the eggs, she became enraged and swallowed Little Fist; and Prince Ivan went home without the eggs. He came to Elena the Fair and told her that he had been unable to get the eggs and that the Firebird had swallowed Little Fist. Elena the Fair and the chieftain were overjoyed and thought that Prince Ivan would be helpless now, without Little Fist. They ordered him to be killed. Prince Ivan heard this order and asked his sister whether he might bathe before dying. 
 Elena the Fair ordered the bath to be heated. Prince Ivan went to the bath and Elena the Fair sent someone to tell him to wash faster. Prince Ivan did not obey her; he continued washing himself unhurriedly. Suddenly the young wolf, the young bear, and the young lion ran to him and told him that Little Fist had escaped from the Firebird and would soon come to him. Prince Ivan ordered them to lie down on the threshold, and kept on washing. Elena the Fair again sent someone to tell him to wash faster, and that if he did not finish soon, she would come herself. Prince Ivan still disobeyed her and did not come out of the bath. Elena the Fair waited and waited, became impatient, and with the chieftain went to see what Prince Ivan was doing. When she came to the bath she saw that he was still washing himself and had not obeyed her order; she grew angry and boxed his ear. Suddenly Little Fist appeared, ordered the young wolf, the young bear, and the young lion to tear the chieftain to little pieces, and tied Elena naked to a tree, so that her body might be devoured by mosquitoes and flies. Then he and Prince Ivan set out traveling. 
 In the distance they beheld a great palace. Little Fist said: "Do you not want to marry, Prince Ivan? In this house lives a champion maiden; she seeks a brave youth who is strong enough to defeat her." They went to her house. Before reaching it, Prince Ivan mounted a horse, Little Fist mounted behind him, and they challenged the champion maiden to combat. They fought and fought; the champion maiden struck Prince 
 
 Ivan in the chest and he almost fell to the ground, but Little Fist held him. Then Prince Ivan struck the champion maiden with his spear and she fell from her horse at once. When he had knocked her down she said: "Now, Prince Ivan, you may marry me." 
 Speedily a tale is spun, less speedily a deed is done. Prince Ivan married the champion maiden. "Well, Prince Ivan," Little Fist said to him, "if you don't feel well the first night, come to me; I will help you in your trouble." Prince Ivan went to bed with the champion maiden. Suddenly she put her hand on his chest and he fell ill. He asked her to let him go out; when he got outside he called Little Fist and told him that the champion maiden wanted to strangle him. Little Fist went to the champion maiden and began to belabor her, repeating: "Respect your husband, respect your husband!" From then on they began to live happily and to prosper. 
 Some time later the champion maiden asked Prince Ivan to untie Elena the Fair and to take her to live in their house. He straightway sent to have her untied and brought to him. Elena the Fair lived in his house for a long time. One day she said to him: "Brother, let me pick the lice from your head." She began to pick his lice and thrust a dead tooth into his head; Prince Ivan began to die. The young lion saw that Prince Ivan was dying and pulled the dead tooth out; the prince began to come back to life and the young lion began to die. The young bear pulled out the tooth; the young lion began to come back to life and the young bear began to die. A fox saw that he was dying; she pulled out the dead tooth. And because she was cleverer than all of them, when she had pulled out the tooth she threw it into a pan and it crumbled to pieces. To punish his sister for this wicked deed Prince Ivan ordered that Elena the Fair be tied to the tail of a mighty horse and that the horse be set loose in the open field. 
 I was there and drank mead; it ran down my mustache, but did not go into my mouth. 
 

