
 ONCE THERE LIVED a priest and his wife; they had a son, Ivanushka, and a daughter, Alionushka. Once Alionushka said to her mother: "Mother, mother, I want to go to the woods to get berries; all my little friends have gone there." "Go, and take your brother along." "Why? He is so lazy, he won't pick any berries." "Never mind, take him! And whichever of you gathers the most berries will receive a pair of red slippers as a present." And so the brother and sister went to pick berries, and they came to the wood. Ivanushka picked and picked and put the berries in a pitcher, but Alionushka ate and ate the berries she picked; she put only two berries in her box. She still had almost nothing when Ivanushka's pitcher was full. Alionushka became envious. "Brother," she said, "let me pick the lice out of your hair." He lay on her knees and fell asleep. Alionushka took out a sharp knife and slew her brother; she dug a ditch and buried him, and took the pitcher with the berries. 
 She came home and gave her mother the berries. "Where is your brother, Ivanushka?" the priest's wife asked. "He straggled behind me in the woods and must have lost his way; I called and called him, sought and sought him, but could not find him anywhere." The father and mother waited for Ivanushka a very long time, but he never came back. 
 Meanwhile, there grew on Ivanushka's grave a clump of tall 
 
 and very straight reeds. Shepherds went by with their herds, saw the reeds, and said: "What excellent reeds have grown here!" One shepherd cut off a reed and made himself a pipe. "Let me try to play it," he said. He put it to his lips, and the pipe began to play a song: 
 Gently, gently, shepherd, blow, Else my heart's blood you will shed. My treacherous sister murdered me For juicy berries, slippers red. 
 "Ah, what a miraculous pipe!" said the shepherd. "How clearly it speaks! This pipe is very precious." "Let me try it," said another shepherd. He took the pipe and put it to his lips, and it played the same song; a third one tried, and again it played the same song. 
 The shepherds came to the village and stopped near the priest's house. "Little father," they said, "give us shelter for the night." "My house is crowded," said the priest. "Let us in, we will show you a marvel." The priest let them in and asked them: "Have you not seen anywhere a boy called Ivanushka? He went to pick berries and all trace of him has been lost." "No, we have not seen him; but we cut a reed on our way, and what a marvelous pipe we made of it! It plays by itself." The shepherd took out the pipe and played, and it sang: 
 Gently, gently, shepherd, blow, Else my heart's blood you will shed. My treacherous sister murdered me For juicy berries, slippers red. 
 "Let me try to play on it," said the priest. He took the pipe and it played its song: 
 Gently, gently, father, blow, Else my heart's blood you will shed. My treacherous sister murdered me For juicy berries, slippers red. 
 
 "Was it not my Ivanushka who was murdered?" said the priest. And he called his wife: "Now you try to play on it." The priest's wife took the pipe and it played its song: 
 Gently, gently, mother, blow, Else my heart's blood you will shed. My treacherous sister murdered me For juicy berries, slippers red. 
 "Where is my daughter?" asked the priest. But Alionushka had hidden herself in a dark corner. They found her. "Now, play the pipe," said her father. "I don't know how." "Never mind, play!" She tried to refuse, but her father spoke sternly to her and made her take the pipe. She had no sooner put it to her lips than the pipe began to play by itself: 
 Gently, gently, sister, blow, Else my heart's blood you will shed. You treacherously murdered me For juicy berries, slippers red. 
 Then Alionushka confessed everything, and her father in his rage drove her out of the house. 
