THERE WAS ONCE a wealthy merchant named Marka, and never was anyone so stingy as he! One day he went for a walk; on his way he saw an old beggar asking for alms: "For Christ's sake, pious men, give me something!" Marka the Wealthy passed him by. But a poor peasant who followed him felt pity for the beggar and gave him a kopek. The rich man felt ashamed, stopped, and said to the peasant: "Listen, fellow countryman, lend me a kopek. I want to give something to the beggar, but I have no small coins." The peasant gave him a kopek and asked: "When shall I come to collect my loan?" "Come tomorrow." The next day the poor man went to the rich man for his kopek. He entered the broad courtyard. "Is Marka the Wealthy at home?" "He is. What do you want?" asked Marka. "I have come for my kopek." "Ah brother, come some other time, I have no small coins now." The poor man bowed low and said: "I will come tomorrow." The following day he came and again was told: "I have no small coins, but if you have change for a hundred rubles, you can get your kopek. If not, come in two weeks." Two weeks later, the poor man again went to the rich man. When Marka the Wealthy saw him through the window, he said to his wife: "Listen, wife, I will undress completely and lie under the icons; and you cover me with a shroud and sit down and lament me as though I were dead. When the peasant comes for his loan, tell him that I died today." 
 The wife did as her husband ordered her; she sat down and shed burning tears. The peasant came into the room, and she asked: "What is it?" "I have come to collect my loan from Marka the Wealthy," answered the poor man. "Ah, little peasant, Marka the Wealthy wished you a long life; he has just died!" "May he go to the kingdom of heaven! Permit me, hostess, to do something for him for my kopek-at least I can wash his sinful body." Saying this, he snatched a kettle of boiling water and poured it over Marka the Wealthy. Marka could 
 
 barely stand it; he gritted his teeth and jerked his feet. "I don't care whether you jerk. Give me back my kopek!" said the poor man. He washed the body and prepared it for burial. "Now, hostess, buy a coffin and have it taken to the church; I will read the psalter over him." Marka the Wealthy was put in a coffin and taken to the church, and the peasant began to read the psalter over him. 
 Dark night came. Suddenly a window opened and thieves broke into the church; the peasant hid behind the altar. The thieves began to share the spoils among them. They shared everything; only a golden saber remained, and each one wanted it for himself and refused to yield it to the others. The poor man suddenly jumped out and cried: "Why do you quarrel? Whoever cuts off the dead man's head shall have the saber!" At this Marka the Wealthy jumped up, beside himself with fear. The thieves were frightened, threw away their money, and took to their heels. "Now, little peasant," said Marka, "let us share the money." They shared it evenly; both of them got a great deal. "And how about my kopek?" said the poor man. "Eh, brother! You can see for yourself, I have no small coins!" And so Marka the Wealthy never returned the kopek. 
