ONE DAY A NOBLEMAN went to market and bought a canary for fifty rubles. A peasant happened to see this, and when he came home he told his wife: "Imagine, today I was at the market and I saw the barin buying a small bird for fifty rubles. I will take my gander to him, perhaps he will buy that." "Take it." The peasant brought his gander to the nobleman. "Barin, buy this gander." "How much is it?" asked the 
 
 nobleman. "A hundred rubles!" "You idiot!" "Since you were willing to pay fifty rubles for a small bird, a hundred is cheap for this one!" The nobleman flew into a rage, beat the peasant, and took his gander for nothing. "Very well," said the peasant, "you will remember this gander." 
 He returned home, disguised himself as a mason, took a saw and ax, and went by the nobleman's house, crying: "Who wants a warm vestibule built?" The nobleman heard him, called him in, and asked: "How will you do it?" "It's very simple. Near here are warm trees; a vestibule built of those warm trees does not have to be heated in winter." "Ah, brother," said the nobleman, "show me those trees at once." "With pleasure." 
 Both of them went to the woods. There the peasant cut an enormous pine tree and began to slice it into two halves; he cut the tree lengthwise and began to drive in a wedge. The nobleman watched him for a while and then foolishly thrust his hand into the cut. No sooner had he done this than the peasant pulled out the wedge and the nobleman's hand was firmly caught. Then the peasant took a leather strap and began to thrash the nobleman, repeating: "Don't beat a peasant, don't take his gander! Don't beat a peasant, don't take his gander!" He thrashed to his heart's delight and said: "Well, barin, I have beaten you once, and I will beat you again unless you return my gander and add a hundred rubles into the bargain." Having said this he left, and the nobleman stayed in the woods till nightfall. In the end his family became worried, but much time went by before they found him and freed him from the vise. 
 The nobleman fell ill, he lay on his bed and moaned. The peasant picked herbs and flowers, stuck them all over himself, disguised himself as a doctor, and once again went near the nobleman's courtyard, crying: "Does someone need curing?" The nobleman heard him, called him in, and said: "Who are you?" "I am a doctor, I can cure every illness." "Ah, brother, please cure me." "Certainly. Have a bath heated." Straightway a bath was heated. "Now come to be cured," said the peasant to the nobleman. "Only don't take anyone with us to the bathroom-watch out for the evil eye!" They went to the bathroom 
 
 and the nobleman undressed. "Well, sir," asked the doctor, "can you bear it if in this heat I apply ointment to you?" "No, I can't," said the nobleman. "What shall we do then? Do you want to be tied?" "Please tie me." The peasant tied him with a rope, took a whip, and began to drub and pommel him, repeating: "Don't beat a peasant, don't take his gander! Don't beat a peasant, don't take his gander!" When he was about to leave, he said: "Now, barin, I have beaten you twice; I shall beat you a third time unless you return the gander and two hundred rubles into the bargain." The nobleman got out of his bath more dead than alive, decided not to wait for a third time, and sent the peasant the gander and two hundred rubles. 
 
