
 A peasant was plowing a field. A bear came to him and said: "Peasant, I will break your bones." "No, do not touch me; I am sowing turnips here, and I will take only the roots for myself and give you the tops." "So be it!" said the bear. "But if you cheat me, do not dare to come into my forest for wood." Having said this, he went off into the thickets. Harvest time came; the peasant dug the turnips and the bear came out of the thicket, saying: "Now, peasant, let us share!" "Very well, little bear; I will bring the tops." And the peasant brought him a cartful of leaves and stalks. The bear was satisfied that the division was honest. 
 The peasant loaded his turnips on a cart and started driving to town to sell them. The bear met him and asked: "Peasant, where are you going?" "I am going to town, little bear, to sell my roots." "Let me taste one of those roots." The peasant gave him a turnip. "When the bear ate it he began to roar: "Aha, so you've cheated me, peasant! Your roots are sweet. Do not dare come to me for wood; I will tear you to pieces." The peasant returned from town and was afraid to go to the forest. He burned his shelves and his benches and his tubs, but in the end there was nothing he could do-he had to go to the forest. He drove in quietly; from somewhere a fox came running. "Why do you walk on tiptoe, little peasant?" she asked. "I am afraid of the bear; he is angry at me and has threatened to tear me to pieces." "Don't fear the bear. Chop your wood, and I will make noises like those the hunters make. If the bear asks, 'What is this?' say: 'It is a bear and wolf hunt.' " 
 The peasant began to cut wood. Suddenly the bear rushed toward him, crying: "Hey, old man, what is this noise?" The peasant said: "It is a bear and wolf hunt." "Oh, little peasant, put me in your sledge, cover me with wood, and tie me with a rope; they will think I am a log." The peasant put him in the 
 
 sledge, tied him with a rope, and hit him on the head with the hutt end of his ax until he was dead. The fox came and said: "Where is the hear?" "He is dead." "Well, little peasant, now you must treat me to something." "Please, little fox, come to my house; I shall indeed treat you." 
 The peasant drove home and the fox ran ahead of him; when the peasant was close to his house, he whistled to his dogs and set them on the fox. The fox ran to the wood, jumped into a hole to hide, and said: "O little eyes, what did you do while I was running?" "O little fox, we saw to it that you did not stumble." "And you, little ears, what did you do?" "We listened all the time to hear whether the hounds were far behind." "And you, tail, what did you do?" "I," said the tail, "threw myself between your legs to entangle you, so that you would fall and be torn to pieces by the dogs." "Ah, you scoundrel! Let the dogs eat you then." And sticking her tail out of the hole, the fox cried: "Eat the fox's tail, dogs!" The dogs dragged the fox out by the tail and strangled her. 
 So does it often happen: because of the tail, the head perishes. 
 
