
 A peasant was driving a cart full of pottery. His horse got tired and stopped near a graveyard. The peasant un-harnessed it, let it graze, and lay down to rest on a grave, but somehow could not fall asleep. Suddenly the grave under him began to open; feeling this, he jumped to his feet. The grave opened wide, and out of it came a corpse holding a coffin lid and dressed in a white shroud. The corpse ran to the church, put the coffin lid in the doorway, and went to the village. Our peasant was a courageous man; he took the coffin lid and stood near his cart, waiting to see what would happen next. 
 After a while the corpse came back and discovered that his coffin lid was gone; he began to follow the tracks, reached the peasant, and said: "Give me back my coffin lid or I will tear you to pieces." "And what is my ax for?" the peasant answered. "I will cut you to pieces myself." "Please, my good man, give it back to me," the corpse implored. "I will not give it to you," said the peasant, "unless you tell me where you have been and what you have done." "I was in the village, and I killed two young fellows there." "Now tell me how they can be brought back to life." Willy-nilly, the corpse had to comply. "Cut the left flap from my shroud," he said, "and take it with you. When you come to the house of the murdered men, fill a pot with burning coal, put the piece of shroud in it, and close the door. The smoke will bring them back to life at once." The peasant cut off the left flap of the shroud and returned the coffin lid. The corpse went back to his grave and the grave opened. He began to descend into it, when suddenly the cocks crowed, and he had no time to cover himself properly; one end of the coffin lid remained outside. 
 The peasant saw and took note of all this. Daybreak came; he harnessed his horse and drove to the village. He heard lamentations and cries in one house; he entered it and found that two young fellows were dead there. "Do not weep," he 
 
 said, "I can bring them back to life." "Do bring them back to life," said the parents. "We will give you half of our possessions." The peasant did as the corpse had told him and the two young fellows came back to life. Their families were overjoyed but at once seized the peasant and tied him with ropes. "Now, you wise man," they said, "we shall take you to the authorities; since you knew how to bring them back to life, you surely killed them too." "Ah, ye faithful, don't ye fear God?" cried the peasant, and he told them everything that had happened to him during the night. The villagers were called together, the people went to the graveyard, found the grave from which the corpse had emerged, dug it up, and thrust a spike of aspen wood straight into his heart, so that he could no longer rise up and kill people. The peasant was richly rewarded and allowed to return home in peace. 
 
