
 ONCE A POTTER was driving along the road with his pots and fell asleep as he went. Tsar Ivan the Terrible overtook him. "There are people on the road who want to pass," the tsar said. The potter looked behind him. "Thank you humbly," he said. "So you've been slumbering?" "I've been slumbering, great king! Fear not him who sings songs, but him who takes a nap!" "You're a bold one, potter! I love such as you. Coachman, drive more slowly! And you, potter, tell me, how long have you been engaged in this trade?" "From my youth, and now I am middle-aged." "Do you support your children?" "I do, Your Majesty, and yet I do not plow, I do not reap, I do not mow, and the cold does not freeze me." "True, potter, and yet the world is not without evil." "Yes, Your Majesty, there are three evils in the world." "And what are these three evils, my little potter?" "The first evil is a bad neighbor; the second evil is a bad wife; and the third evil is a bad mind." "And now tell me, which of these evils is the worst?" "From a bad neighbor I can go away; from a bad wife I can also go away if she agrees to stay with the children; but from one's own bad mind one cannot go away, it is always with one." "Yes, that is true, potter, you are a smart fellow. Listen: you stick to me, and I'll stick to you. Geese will come from 
 
 Russia: pluck their feathers, and leave them in the proper condition!" "I will leave them in the proper condition, and I will pluck them clean." "Well, potter, stop for a while, I want to see your pottery." 
 The potter stopped and displayed his merchandise. The tsar looked at it and chose three earthen dishes. "Will you make me some more of these?" "How many does Your Majesty want?" "I need about a dozen cartfuls." "How much time can you give me?" "A month." "I can deliver them in two weeks. I'll stick by you, and you stick by me." "Thanks, potter." "And you, king, where will you be when I bring this merchandise to town?" "I will be staying in the merchant's house." The tsar arrived in town and gave orders that everyone use only earthenware at all receptions, and that no silver, lead, copper or wooden dishes be set on the table. 
 The potter finished the tsar's order and brought his merchandise to town. A certain boyar came to buy earthenware from him and said to him: "God be with you, potter." "I am your humble servant." "Sell me all your merchandise." "No, I cannot, I made it for a special order." "Don't worry about that. Take this money. You cannot be held to your promise if you did not receive an advance payment for your work. Well, how much do you want?" "Fill each of my vessels with money." "My dear little potter, don't try to make a fool of me; that is too much." "Very well then, for each vessel filled, you will get two. Do you agree?" They agreed- "You stick to me, and I'll stick to you." They began to fill the pots and empty them, to pour in and pour out. They ran out of money, and there was still a great deal of merchandise. The boyar went home to get more money. Again they poured and poured, and there still was a great deal of merchandise left, and no money. "What shall we do, my little potter?" the boyar asked. "You were too greedy and now you haven't enough money to pay! I will take your plight into consideration, but in the meantime, do you know what I shall make you do? Pull me to that house: then I will give you both the merchandise and all the money." 
 The boyar hesitated for a long time. He was sorry about his money, and also about his dignity; but there was nothing to be 
 
 done, so he finally agreed. The horse was unharnessed, the peasant sat in the cart, and the boyar began to pull him; the potter sang a song, and the boyar dragged and dragged. "Where shall I pull you?" he asked. "To that house over there." The potter sang merrily, and when he was close to the house he raised his voice high. The tsar heard him, ran out on the porch, and recognized the potter. "Ha, welcome, potter!" "Thank you, Your Majesty." "What are you driving on?" "On a bad mind, Your Majesty." "Well, you are a smart fellow, potter, you have managed to sell your goods. Boyar, take off your boyar's garment and your boots, and you, potter, take off your caftan and your shoes of bast. You put them on, boyar, and you, potter, put on this boyar's garments. He knew how to sell his goods! The potter did not work long, but he earned a great deal-and you did not know how to guard your boyar's rank. Well, potter, did the geese come from Russia?" "They did." "Did you pluck their feathers, and leave them in the proper condition?" "No, Your Majesty, I plucked him clean, all of him." 
 
 

