
 AN OLD couple had a cat and a ram. The old woman prepared cream to make butter with, and the cat stole some of it. "Old man," said the old woman, "there's mischief in our cellar!" "You must see," said the old man, "whether some stranger is not playing tricks on us." The old woman went to the cellar and saw the cat pushing the lid of the pot aside with his paw and lapping some cream; she drove him out of the cellar and went back into the house, but the cat had preceded her and hidden on the stove in a corner. "Husband," said the old woman, "we did not believe that our own cat was the offender, but it is he indeed; let us kill him." Hearing these words, the cat jumped from the stove, rushed to the ram in the stall, and said: "Brother ram, I am to be killed tomorrow, and you are to be slaughtered." 
 The two animals decided to run away from their owner that night. "But how shall I do it?" the ram asked. "I should be glad to take flight with you, but my shed is locked." "Never mind!" said the cat. He climbed up the door, removed the string from the nail with his paw, and set the ram free. And so they went wandering along the roads. They found a wolf's head, took it up, and continued walking; then they saw a little fire in the woods at some distance, and went straight to the fire. 
 They came up and found twelve wolves warming themselves around the fire. "God be with you, wolves!" "Welcome, cat and ram!" "Brother," said the ram to the cat, "what do we have for supper?" "We have twelve wolves' heads. Go and choose the fattest." The ram went into the bushes, raised high the wolf's head they had found on the road, and asked: "This one, brother cat?" "No, choose a better one!" The ram raised the head once more and asked: "How about this one?" The wolves took such fright that they would gladly have run away, but they did not dare do so without first asking permission. Four 
 
 wolves came to the cat and the ram, begging: "Please, let us go get some wood for you!" And these four left. The remaining eight wolves became even more fearful than before, thinking, "Since they could eat twelve, they will be able to eat eight even more easily!" Four more wolves asked permission to go for water. The cat let them go. "You may go, but come back soon," he said. 
 The last four wolves went to get the others, saying: "Why haven't they come back?" The cat let them go, ordering them even more sternly to come back soon; but he and the ram were really happy that the wolves had gone. 
 The wolves gathered together and went farther into the woods. They met the bear, Mikhailo Ivanovich. "Have you heard, Mikhailo Ivanovich, of a cat and a ram who ate twelve wolves?" "No, my boys, I haven't heard of them." "But we have seen this cat and ram ourselves." "I too should like to see how brave they are!" "Eh, Mikhailo Ivanovich, the cat is awfully quick-tempered, there is no way of winning his favor; at any moment he may jump on you and tear you to pieces. We are nimble with dogs and hares, but the cat is a different matter. It would be better to invite them for dinner." They sent for the fox and said to her: "Go and invite the cat and the ram." The fox began to excuse herself: "It's true I am nimble, but I am not good at dodging-they might eat me." "Go!" There was nothing to be done, so the fox ran to invite the cat and the ram. She came back and said: "They promised to come. Ah, Mikhailo Ivanovich, how fierce that cat is! I found him sitting on a tree stump and breaking it with his paws: he was sharpening his knives against us! And he rolled his eyes in the most terrifying manner!" The bear was scared, put one wolf on a high tree stump to be the lookout, gave him a piece of rag, and said: "When you see the cat and the ram, wave the rag, and we'll all go out to meet them." They began to cook dinner; four wolves dragged up four cows, and the bear appointed a marmot as cook. 
 The cat and the ram were on the way to pay their visit, when they saw the lookout and suspected foul play. The cat said: "I will crawl quietly in the grass and sit close by the tree stump 
 
 facing the wolf; and you, brother ram, take a run and hit him with your head as you pass him at full speed." The ram began to run and hit the wolf with all his strength and threw him down, while the cat jumped at his snout and clawed it and scratched it till it bled. When the bear and the wolves saw this, they began to talk among themselves: "Now you see what the cat and the ram can do! They managed to throw Evstifeyko the wolf from a high tree stump and maul him: how can we hold our ground against them? Apparently they do not give a fig for our preparations; they have come here not to enjoy a treat but to hurt us. Ah, brothers, wouldn't we do better to hide?" 
 All the wolves scattered in the woods, the bear climbed into a pine tree, the marmot crawled into a hole, and the fox hid under a log. The cat and the ram fell upon the prepared feast. As the cat ate he kept mewing: "Not much, not much!" 
 Then he happened to look back, saw the marmot's tail sticking from the hole, took fright, and jumped into the pine tree. The bear was frightened by the cat, flung himself down from the pine tree, and rushed forward, almost crushing the fox under the log. The bear ran away and so did the fox. "So you hurt yourself?" said the fox to the bear. "No, mate. If I had not jumped off the tree, the cat would have eaten me long ago!" 
 
 

 
 

