A certain nobleman had many head of cattle. One day he 
 killed and skinned five sheep, because he wanted to have 
 a coat made of the skins. He sent for a tailor and said to 
 him: "Now sew up a sheepskin for me." The tailor measured 
 him and found that he needed half a skin more. "You don't 
 
 
 
 have enough skins," he said. "I need some more for the lapels." "That's easy," answered the nobleman, and ordered his lackey to remove half the skin of one ram. The lackey carried out the order. The ram became angry at the nobleman, called the goat, and said to him: "Let's run away from this wicked man; we can live in the woods, eat grass, drink water, and be happy." And so they did. They went to the forest, built a cabin for the nights, and lived happily eating grass. 
 Many other beasts also disliked living with the nobleman, and a cow, a pig, a cock, and a gander also left his farm. While it was warm, these creatures lived in the open, but when icy winter came, they sought a refuge from the cold. They walked and walked through the woods, found the ram's cabin, and begged him to let them in. "Please, give us shelter," they said. "We are very cold." But the ram and the goat refused. Then the cow came up to the door and said: "Let us in, else I will knock down your cabin!" The ram saw that he had no choice and admitted the cow. The pig came up. "Let me in," he said, "else I will dig up all the ground around your house, make a tunnel to the door, and freeze you out!" There was nothing they could do, so they admitted the pig. A moment later, the gander said: "Let me in or I'll peck a hole in the wall, and the cold wind will come in." And the cock said: "Let me in, or I'll befoul your whole roof." What could they do? They admitted the birds too and all of them began to live together. 
 After some time, a long time or a short time, robbers passed by the cabin and heard cries and noises coming from inside. They came close, listened, could not guess who was there, and sent one of their companions to find out. "Go in," they said, "else we shall put a rope around your neck and throw you into the water." There was nothing the fellow could do, so he opened the door. The moment he set foot in the cabin, he was attacked from all sides and was forced to turn back. "Well, brothers," he said, "do what you will, but I won't go back in there for anything in the world. In all my life I have never been so frightened. The moment I stepped in, a woman began to thrash me with an oven fork; her daughter fell upon me in her turn; then a cobbler thrust an awl into my back; then a tailor cut me with 
 
 his scissors; then a soldier armed with spurs jumped at me in such fury that his hair stood on end; he shouted in a terrible voice. And the biggest of them all began to mutter threateningly. I was scared out of my wits." "Not so good," said the robbers. "Let's move out of this-they might come after us." And they left. 
 And so the beasts went on living together. One day wolves came to their cabin and by the smell knew who was there. They said to one of their band: "Go in, be the first of us." He had no sooner opened the door than all the beasts in the cabin began to thrash him and he barely escaped with his life. The wolves did not know what to do. A hedgehog was with them, and he said: "Just wait, let me try; I think I can do better." For he knew that the ram had lost one side of his skin. So he waddled in and pricked the ram; the ram gave a tremendous jump over all his companions and ran away. All of them followed him and took to their heels. Then the wolves moved into the cabin and stayed there. 
 
