
 Near A highway a peasant was sowing a field. Just then the tsar rode by, stopped near the peasant, and said: "Godspeed, little peasant!" "Thank you, my good man!" (He did not know that he was speaking to the tsar.) "Do you earn much profit from this field?" "If the harvest is good, 
 
 I may make eighty rubles." "What do you do with this money?" "Twenty rubles go for taxes, twenty go for debts, twenty I give in loans, and twenty I throw out of the window." "Explain to me, brother, what debts you must pay, to whom you loan money, and why you throw money out the window." "Supporting my father is paying a debt; feeding my son is lending money; feeding my daughter is throwing it out of the window." "You speak the truth," said the tsar. He gave the peasant a handful of silver coins, disclosed that he was the tsar, and forbade the man to tell these things to anyone outside of his presence: "No matter who asks you, do not answer!" 
 The tsar came to his capital and summoned his boyars and generals. "Solve this riddle," he said to them. "On my way I. saw a peasant who was sowing a field. I asked him what profit he earned from it and what he did with his money. He answered that if the harvest was good he got eighty rubles, and that he paid out twenty rubles in taxes, twenty for debts, twenty as loans, and twenty he threw out of the window. To him who solves this riddle I will give great rewards and great honors." The boyars and generals thought and thought but could not solve the riddle. But one boyar hit upon the idea of going to the peasant with whom the tsar had spoken. He gave the peasant a whole pile of silver rubles and asked him: "Tell me the answer to the tsar's riddle." The peasant cast a glance at the money, took it, and explained everything to the boyar, who returned to the tsar and repeated the solution of the riddle. 
 The tsar realized that the peasant had not abided by the imperial command, and ordered that he. be brought to court. The peasant appeared before the tsar and at once admitted that he had told everything to the boyar. "Well, brother, for such an offense I must order you put to death, and you have only yourself to thank for it." "Your Majesty, I am not guilty of any offense, because I told everything to the boyar in your presence." As he said this, the peasant drew from his pocket a silver ruble with the tsar's likeness on it, and showed it to the tsar. "You speak the truth," said the tsar. "This is my person." And he generously rewarded the peasant and sent him home. 
