IN A CERTAIN VILLAGE there lived two brothers, one rich and the other poor. The poor brother came to the rich one to borrow a horse to bring wood from the forest. The rich brother gave him a horse. The poor brother also asked for a yoke; the rich one angrily refused. So the poor one tied his sledge to the horse's tail, went to the forest, cut a huge load of wood, so heavy that the horse could hardly drag it, came to his own yard, and opened the gate, but forgot to remove the board across the gate. The horse tried to push through the board and tore off its tail. The poor brother brought the now tailless horse back to the rich brother, who refused to take it back and set out to bring complaint against the poor one before Shemiaka, the judge. The poor man knew that he was in sore trouble, for he had nothing to give to the judge. Sadly he followed his brother. 
 The two brothers came to a rich peasant's house and asked to be allowed to spend the night. The peasant drank and made merry with the rich brother, but refused to invite the poor one to his table. The poor brother lay on the stove, looking at them; suddenly he fell from the stove and crushed to death a child lying in a cradle below. So the peasant also set out to see Shemiaka the judge, to lodge a complaint against the poor brother. 
 As they walked to the town (the rich brother, the peasant, and the poor brother, who walked behind them), they happened to cross a high bridge. The poor brother, thinking that he would not escape with his life from Shemiaka the judge, jumped from the bridge, hoping to kill himself. Under the bridge a man was carrying his sick father to the bathhouse; the poor brother fell onto the sledge and crushed the sick man to death. The son went to complain to Shemiaka the judge on the ground that the poor man had killed his father. 
 The rich brother came to Shemiaka the judge and lodged a 
 
 complaint against the. poor one for having torn off the tail of his horse. In the meantime the poor brother had picked up a stone and wrapped it in a kerchief. Standing behind his brother he thought: "If the judge judges against me I will kill him with this stone." But the judge, thinking that the poor man had prepared a bribe of a hundred rubles, ordered the rich brother to give the horse to the poor one to keep until it grew another tail. 
 Then the rich peasant came before the judge and lodged his complaint about the death of his child. The poor man took out the same stone and showed it to the judge from where he stood behind the peasant. The judge, thinking that he was being offered another hundred rubles, for the second case, ordered the peasant to give his wife to the poor man to keep until she gave birth to another child, adding: "And then take back your wife and the child." 
 The third plaintiff accused the poor man of having crushed his father to death. The poor man showed the same stone to the judge. The judge, thinking that he was being offered still another hundred rubles, ordered the dead man's son to go to the bridge and said: "And you, poor man, stand under the bridge, and you, son, jump from the bridge and crush the poor man to death." 
 Shemiaka the judge then sent a servant to the poor man to ask for three hundred rubles. The poor man showed his stone and said: "If the judge had judged against me, I would have killed him with this stone." The servant came to the judge and said: "If you had judged against him, he would have killed you with a stone." The judge crossed himself and said: "Thank God that I judged in his favor." 
 The poor brother went to the rich brother to get the horse, in accordance with the verdict, until it should grow another tail. The rich brother did not want to give away his horse; instead, he gave the poor brother five hundred rubles, three measures of grain, and a milk goat, and made peace with him. 
 The poor man went to the peasant and, citing the verdict, asked for the peasant's wife until she should give birth to a child. Instead, the peasant gave him five hundred rubles, a cow 
 
 with her calf, a mare with her colt, and four measures of grain, and made peace with him. 
 The poor man went to the plaintiff whose father he had killed and told him that in accordance with the judge's verdict he, the son, must stand on the bridge, and he himself, the poor man, under the bridge, and that the son must jump on him and crush him to death. The son thought: "If I jump from the bridge I shall not crush him but shall smash myself to death." He gave the poor man two hundred rubles, a horse, and five measures of grain, and made peace with him. 
 
 
