IN A CERTAIN LAND, in a certain kingdom, there were certain impassable swamps. A circuitous road went around them; it took three years to travel fast on this road, and if one traveled slowly, even five were not enough! Near the road lived a poor old man who had three sons: the first was named Ivan, the second Vasily, and the third was little Semyon. The old man determined to clear the swamps, to lay a straight road for travelers on foot and travelers on horseback, and to build white hazelwood bridges over the streams, so that a man on foot could pass through the swamps in three weeks and a rider on horseback in three days. He set to work together with his sons, and after not a little time everything was finished just as he had planned it: sturdy were the white hazel bridges and cleared was the fine straight road. 
 The poor man returned to his hut and said to Ivan, his firstborn: "Go, my beloved son, sit under the first bridge and listen to what folk say about us-whether it will be good or evil." Obedient to his father's command, Ivan hid himself under the bridge. 
 Two venerable hermits walked over the bridge and said to each other: "To him who laid this bridge and cleared the road, whatever he asks of the Lord, the Lord will give it to him!" As soon as Ivan heard these words, he came out from under the hazelwood bridge, and said: "This bridge I laid with my father and brothers." "And what do you wish of the Lord?" the holy men asked him. "That the Lord make me rich for the rest of my life!" "Very well, go to the open field. In the open field there is an old oak. Under that oak is a deep vault, and in that vault are gold and silver and precious stones galore. Take a shovel and dig-the Lord will make you rich for life!" Ivan went to the open field, dug up much gold and silver and many precious stones under the oak, and took them home. "Well, little son," the poor man asked him, "have you seen anyone walking or driving over the bridge? And what do people say 
 
 about us?" Ivan told his father that he had seen two venerable men and that they had rewarded him for life. 
 The next day the poor man sent Vasily, his middle son, to the bridge. Vasily sat under the hazel logs and listened. Two venerable men walked over the bridge, came to the spot above his hiding place, and said: "He who laid this bridge, whatever he asks of the Lord, the Lord will give it to him." As soon as Vasily heard these words, he came out and said: "This bridge I laid with my father and brothers." "And what do you ask of the Lord?" "That the Lord give me bread for the rest of my life!" "Very well, go home, stake out a piece of fresh land, and sow it; the Lord will give you bread for all your life!" Vasily came home, told his father all that had happened, marked out a piece of fresh land, and sowed it with grain. 
 The third day the poor man sent his youngest son to the bridge. Little Semyon sat under the logs and listened. Two venerable men walked over the bridge, came to the spot above his hiding place, and said: "He who laid this bridge, whatever he asks of the Lord, the Lord will give it to him." Little Semyon heard these words, came out, and said: "This bridge I laid with my father and brothers." "And what do you ask of the Lord?" "I ask of him a favor-to serve as a soldier to the great sovereign!" "Ask for something else. A soldier's service is hard; if you become a soldier, you will fall captive to the Sea King, and many tears will you shed!" "Eh, you are venerable hermits and you know very well he who does not weep in this world will weep in the next!" "Well, since you will serve the king, we give you our blessing!" said the venerable old men. They put their hands on little Semyon and turned him into a fleet-footed stag. 
 The stag ran to his father's house. From the window his father and brothers saw him, jumped out of the hut, and wanted to catch him. The stag turned back. He came running to the two venerable old men, and they turned him into a hare. The hare darted back to the house; the father and brothers saw him, jumped out of the hut, and wanted to catch him, but he turned back again. He came running to the two venerable old men, who turned him into a little bird with a golden head. 
 
 The bird flew to the house and sat on the window sill. The father and brothers saw him and jumped up to catch him, but he took wing and flew back. The bird came flying to the two venerable old men, who turned him into a human again and said: "Now, little Semyon, you can go into the king's service. If you ever need to run somewhere in a hurry, you can turn into a stag, a hare, and a bird with a golden head. We have taught you how." 
 Little Semyon went home and asked his father's permission to go into the king's service. "Why should you go?" answered the poor man. "You are still young and foolish." "No, father, let me go; it is God's will." The poor man gave permission, and little Semyon made his bundle, said farewell to his father and brothers, and set out on his way. 
 After some time, a long time or a short time, he came to the king's court, went straight to the king himself, and said: "Your Majesty, do not punish me, let me speak." "Speak, little Semyon." "Your Majesty, take me into your service." "Impossible! You are small and foolish; how could you serve?" "Although I am small and stupid, I will serve no worse than the others; God will help me." The king consented, took him as a soldier, and ordered him to stay near his person. Some time passed, and suddenly a certain king declared a terrible war against our king. He began to prepare himself to take the field; at the appointed hour his whole army assembled. Little Semyon asked permission to go to war; the king could not refuse him, so took him with him and set out to the field of battle. 
 For a long, long time the king marched with his troops. He left many, many lands behind him, and soon was close to the enemy-in about three days he would have to give battle. At that moment the king realized that he had neither his battle mace nor his sharp sword with him. He had forgotten them in his palace; he had nothing to defend himself with, to defeat the enemy forces with. He issued a call to all his troops: would someone undertake to go to the palace in a hurry and bring him his battle mace and sharp sword? To him who would do this service he promised his daughter, Princess Maria, in marriage, half his kingdom as a dowry, and the other half after his death. 
 
 Volunteers presented themselves; some said that they could do the errand in three years; others, in two years; still others, in one year. But little Semyon said to the sovereign: "Your Majesty, I can go to the palace and bring the battle mace and the sharp sword in three days." The king was delighted, took him by the hand, kissed him on the mouth, and at once wrote a letter to Princess Maria telling her to trust this messenger and to give him the sword and the mace. Little Semyon took the letter from the king and set out on his way. 
 Having traveled about one verst, he turned into a fleet-footed stag and darted off like an arrow from a bow. He ran and ran until he got tired and turned from a stag into a hare; then he raced ahead at a hare's pace. He ran and ran until all his legs were weary and then turned from a hare into a little bird with a golden head; he flew even faster, flew and flew, and in a day and a half reached the kingdom where Princess Maria was. He turned back into a human, entered the palace, and gave the princess the letter. Princess Maria took it, unsealed it, read it, and said: "But how could you run across so many lands so speedily?" "This is how!" answered the messenger; he turned into a fleet-footed stag, ran once or twice across the princess' chamber, approached the princess, and put his head on her knees. She took her scissors and cut a tuft of fur from his head. The stag turned into a hare, the hare capered a little in the chamber and jumped on the princess' knees. She cut a tuft of fur from him then too. The hare turned into a little bird with a golden head, the bird flew about the room a little and perched on the princess' hand. Princess Maria cut a golden feather from his head, and wrapped all these-the stag's fur, the hare's fur, and the golden feather-into a handkerchief and hid them on her person. The bird with the golden head then turned back into a messenger. 
 The princess gave him meat and drink, helped him to get ready for his journey, and gave him the battle mace and the sharp sword; then they said good-by to each other, kissed heartily in farewell, and little Semyon went back to the king. Again he ran as a fleet-footed stag, bounded as a slant-eyed hare, flew as a little bird, and by the end of the third day saw the 
 
 king's camp near by. At about three hundred paces from the army he lay down on the beach near a bayberry bush, to rest from his journey; he put the battle mace and the sharp sword by his side. From great weariness he fell asleep soon, and soundly. Just then a general happened to pass by the bayberry bush, saw the messenger, straightway pushed him into the sea, took the battle mace and the sharp sword, brought them to the king, and said: "Your Majesty, here are your battle mace and sharp sword, I fetched them myself-and that braggart, little Semyon, will surely take three years!" The king thanked the general, began to fight with the enemy, and in a short time won a brilliant victory over him. 
 As for little Semyon, we have seen that he fell into the sea. That very moment the Sea King seized him and carried him to the deepest depth. He lived with this king for a whole year, grew bored and sad, and wept bitterly. The Sea King came to him and said: "Well, little Semyon, are you bored here?" "I am bored, Your Majesty!" "Would you fain go to the Russian world?" "I would, if such is your royal favor." The Sea King carried him out exactly at midnight, left him on the shore, and himself returned to the sea. Little Semyon prayed to God: "Lord, give me some sun!" Just before the rising of the red sun the Sea King came, again snatched him and carried him to the depths of the sea. 
 Little Semyon lived there for another whole year. He became bored, and wept very bitterly. The Sea King asked him: "What is the matter, are you bored?" "I am bored," said little Semyon. "Would you fain go to the Russian world?" "I would, Your Majesty." The Sea King took him out to the shore at midnight, and himself returned to the sea. Little Semyon prayed to God with tears in his eyes: "My Lord, give me some sun!" Day had just begun to break when the Sea King came and snatched him and carried him once more to the depths of the sea. Little Semyon lived in the sea for a third year, became bored, and wept bitterly, inconsolably. "What is the matter, Semyon, are you bored?" the Sea King asked him. "Would you fain go to the Russian world?" "I would, Your Majesty." The Sea King cast him out on the shore, and himself returned to the sea. 
 
 
 
 Semyon, the little youth, prayed to God with tears in his eyes: "My Lord, give me some sun!" Suddenly the sun shone with his bright rays, and now the Sea King no longer could take him into captivity. 
 Little Semyon set out for his kingdom. He turned first into a stag, then into a hare, and then into a little bird with a golden head. After a short time he found himself near the king's palace. And while all this had been happening, the king had come back from the war and betrothed his daughter, Princess Maria, to the deceitful general. Little Semyon entered the chamber in which the bridegroom and the promised bride were sitting at table. Princess Maria saw him and said to the king: "Sovereign, my father! Do not punish me, let me speak." "Speak, my dear daughter! What do you wish?" "Sovereign, my father! My bridegroom is not the one who is sitting at the table, but the one who has just come! Now show us, little Semyon, how at that time you ran speedily for the battle mace and the sharp sword." Little Semyon turned into a fleet-footed stag, ran once or twice across the chamber, and stopped near the princess. Princess Maria took from her kerchief the bit of fur she had cut from the stag, showed the king the spot at which she had clipped it, and said: "Look, father! Here are my proofs." The stag turned into a hare; the hare capered in the chamber and leapt to the princess' knee. Princess Maria took the bit of hare's fur from her kerchief. The hare turned into a little bird with a golden head; the bird flew a little in the chamber and perched on the princess' hand. Princess Maria untied the third knot in her kerchief and showed the golden feather. Then the king learned the real truth, ordered the general to be put to death, married Princess Maria to little Semyon, and made him his heir. 
