
 Martynko WAS lonely. He decided to get married and went to propose to the priest's daughter, Ustinia. The priest told him: "Eh, Martynko, I would gladly give her to you, but how will you live with her? She is so capricious!" Martynko answered him: "Father, I am alone; with her there will be two of us, but there will be no one to be angry at and no one to quarrel with." The priest agreed to give Ustinia to Martynko, and they were married. Martynko took his wife to his house. She asked: "When you get angry, what do you do?" He said: "When I am angry, I get drunk on water!" Then 
 
 he asked Ustinia: "And you, Ustinia, what do you do when you get angry?" "When I am angry, I sit on the stove with my face to the corner and put the front of my headband to the back." Next morning our Martynko took his piebald horse to plow for the spring sowing. Ustinia made curd cakes and brought them to her husband, crying: "Peasant, come and eat!" He pretended not to hear and went on plowing. Ustinia grew angry, went home, ate her cakes, and sat on the stove, turning her face to the corner. When Martynko came home, he drank two jugs of water, took a lamb and tore it asunder, started to climb up to his wife on the stove, fell down, rolled on the floor as far as the door, and began to snore. His wife quietly got down from the stove, did not dare open the door, got wood through the window, made a fire in the stove, and cooked dinner for Martynko. He awoke, she served him his dinner, and asked him to take her to visit her father. Martynko harnessed his piebald mare to the sledge-although it was spring-and they set out. On the way their mare refused to pull, so Martynko cut off her head and harnessed his Ustinia to the sledge. He drove to his father-in-law's house; the priest's wife and her daughters saw that Ustinia was dragging Martynko. They rushed out to meet the two; some of them pulled the shafts and some the ropes, to help Ustinia; and the priest thanked Martynko for having given a lesson to all shrews. They came to the priest's house; Ustinia asked her family to keep water out of sight and to serve only wine and beer, saying that when Martynko drank water, he was terribly angry. The next day a cook left a pail of water in the entrance hall. Martynko drank some water, became as foolish as a drunken man, and ordered Ustinia to harness herself to the sledge; she trembled, and begged her father to give them his chestnut horse. The priest made them a gift of a horse; Martynko and Ustinia drove home, and to this day they are still living and chewing bread. And Ustinia is a most obedient wife. 
 

