 IN A certain kingdom an old man and his old wife were living in great misery. When her time came the old woman died. Outside it was bitter, frosty winter weather. The old man went to his neighbors and friends and asked them to help him to dig a grave for his wife, but knowing his utter poverty they bluntly refused. The old man went to the priest-and the priest of his village was very greedy and unscrupulous. "Holy father," said the old man, "please bury my wife." "And have you money to pay for the burial? Pay me in advance, my friend." "There is no use hiding from you that I have not a penny in my house. But wait awhile; when I earn some money, I will pay you with interest; I swear that I will pay you." 
 The priest refused even to listen to the old man. "If you have no money," he said, "don't dare to come to me!" "I have no choice," thought the old man, "but to go to the graveyard, dig a grave somehow, and bury my wife myself." He took an ax and a shovel and went to the graveyard. He began to dig the grave. First he cut the frozen ground with his ax, then he took his shovel, and dug and dug; he dug up a little pot, looked into it, and found it full to the brim with gold pieces gleaming like fire. The old man was overjoyed: "Glory be to God!" he said. "Now I have enough money to give my wife a decent burial and provide a funeral dinner." He stopped digging the grave, took the pot of gold, and went home. 
 Money, as always, made everything go as smoothly as butter. Good people were found at once to dig the grave and make the coffin; the old man sent his daughter-in-law to buy wine and all kinds of viands, everything that is needed for a funeral feast, then took a gold piece and again went to the priest. As soon as he set foot on the doorstep, the priest fell upon him. "I told you clearly, you old dotard, not to come without money, and yet you're here again," he said. "Do not be angry, holy father," the old man begged him, "here is a gold piece. Bury my wife and I shall never forget your kindness." The priest 
 
 took the money and could not find ways enough of being gracious to the old man. He begged him to sit down and spoke fawning words to him: "Well, dear old man, be of good cheer; everything will be done as it should be." The old man bowed to him and went home, and the priest and his wife began to talk about him. "The old rascal!" they said. "Everyone says he is poor, very poor, yet he came here with a gold piece. I have buried many wealthy people in my life, and never has anyone given me as much as this." 
 The priest gathered all his attendants and gave the old woman a decent burial. After the burial the old man invited the priest to the funeral repast. All the mourners came to his house, sat at table, and out of nowhere appeared wine and meats and plenty of everything. The priest sat there eating enough for three, and his mouth watered at the sight of another man's goods. After dinner the visitors began to go home, and the priest too rose from his chair. The old man went with him to the gate, and as soon as they were out in the yard, and the priest saw that no one could hear them, he began to question the old man. "My dear friend," he said, "confess to me, do not let a sin weigh on your soul; you may speak to me as to God himself. How have you managed to improve your fortunes so quickly? You were a poor peasant, and now all of a sudden you have everything. Confess, my friend! Whom have you killed, whom have you robbed?" "Holy father, what are you saying? I will confess the whole truth to you. I did not rob, I did not kill anyone; a treasure-trove came into my hands of itself." And he told the priest everything. 
 Upon hearing this, the priest began to tremble with greed. He returned home and could not attend to anything. Night and day he had only one thought: "The idea of such a wretched little peasant having so much money-how can I get my hands on his potful of gold?" He spoke about it to his wife; they put their heads together and finally thought of a plan. The priest said: "Listen, wife, we have a goat, haven't we?" "We have." "Well, that's fine. At night we shall do everything that is necessary." Late at night the priest dragged the goat to his room, slaughtered it, and removed its whole skin, with the horns and 
 
 the beard. Then he put the goatskin on himself and said to his wife: "Take a needle and thread and sew the skin around me so that it stays on." The priest's wife took a thick needle and coarse thread and sewed the goatskin around him. 
 On the stroke of midnight the priest went straight to the old man's house, came to the window, and knocked and scratched on it. The old man heard the noise, jumped up, and asked: "Who is there?" "The devil!" said the priest. "Our house is consecrated!" the peasant yelled, and began to make the sign of the cross and to chant prayers. 
 "Listen, old man," said the priest. "You won't get rid of me, no matter how long you pray or how many times you make the sign of the cross. You had better give me your pot of money, or I'll settle your account. I took pity on your grief-I showed you a treasure-trove, thinking that you would take just a little of it to pay for your wife's burial, but you took it all." The old man looked out of the window, saw the goat's horns and beard, and was certain that it was the devil himself. "Let him go to hell with the money," thought the old man. "I've lived without money before and I can live without it in the future." He got his pot of gold, took it out into the street, threw it on the ground, and rushed back to his house. The priest snatched up the money and ran home. Upon his return he said: "Well, now the money is ours. Here, wife, store it away in a safe place, and then take a sharp knife, cut the threads, and remove the goatskin before anyone sees me." 
 The priest's wife took a knife and began to cut the skin along the seam. Suddenly blood began to spurt, and the priest yelled: "Wife, it hurts! Don't cut, don't cut!" She tried to cut at another place, but the same thing happened. The goatskin had grown to the priest's body, and no matter what they did, no matter what they tried-they even took the money back to the old man-it was of no avail: the goatskin stuck to the priest. That was how the Lord punished him for his greed. 
 


