ONCE UPON A time there was a peasant who had two sons. The younger one traveled, the elder stayed at home. Before the father died he bequeathed all that he had to his elder son, and left nothing to the younger one, thinking that a brother would surely not wrong a brother. The elder son buried his father and kept all of the inheritance. The second son returned and wept bitterly on finding his father dead. His brother said to him: "Our father left everything to me alone." Yet this brother had no children, while the younger brother had a son of his own and an adopted daughter. 
 And so the elder brother took all of the inheritance, grew rich, and began to trade in precious goods, while the younger brother was poor, chopped wood, and carted it to market. His neighbors, pitying his poverty, took up a collection for him and offered him money to enable him at least to set himself up 
 
 as a retail merchant. The poor man was afraid and said to them: "No, my good neighbors, I won't take your money; for should I suffer losses in trade, who will pay my debt to you?" Then two of his neighbors determined to give him money by a stratagem. One day when the poor man went to get wood, one of these neighbors contrived to meet him by taking a detour and said: "I had just left the house for a distant voyage, when someone who owed me three hundred rubles met me on the way and paid me. Now I don't know where to put the money. I don't want to return home, so please take it, keep it for me, or rather trade with it. I won't be back for a long time; you can pay me later, little by little." 
 The poor man took the money, brought it home, and was afraid that he might lose it or that his wife might find it and spend it instead of his own money. He thought and thought, and finally hid it in a wooden tub full of ashes. While he was away, traders who bought ashes and paid for them in goods came to his house; his wife exchanged the tub of ashes for some goods. When the husband returned and saw that the tub was gone he asked his wife: "Where are the ashes?" His wife answered: "I sold them to the traders." He was frightened and very unhappy, but kept silent nonetheless. His wife saw that he was sad; she began to press him to tell her what misfortune had befallen him and why he was so distressed. He confessed that some money that did not belong to him was hidden in the ashes. His wife grew angry, shouted, and wept. "Why didn't you trust me?" she said. "I would have hidden the money in a better place!" 
 Again the peasant went for wood to sell at the market so that he might buy bread. Another of his neighbors overtook him, told him the same thing as the first, and gave him five hundred rubles to keep for him. The poor man refused to take them, but the neighbor forced the money into his hands and rode away. The money was in bills; our poor man thought and thought about where to put it and finally stuck it under the lining of his cap. He came to the forest, hung his cap on a pine tree, and began to chop wood. As ill luck would have it, a raven snatched his cap with the money in it and flew away. The 
 
 peasant was sad but resigned himself to his fate. He lived as before, traded in wood and other cheap things, and somehow struggled along. The neighbors waited for some time and then realized that the poor man's lot had not improved. They asked him: "Are you unsuccessful in your trade, brother? Or are you afraid that you will lose our money? If so, better give it back to us." The poor man wept and told them how he had lost the money. His neighbors did not believe him and brought the matter to court. "How shall I decide this case?" thought the judge. "This peasant is a peaceful man, but penniless; he has nothing that can be taken from him, and if I send him to prison his family will die of starvation!" 
 The judge was sitting by the window sunk in meditation when he was distracted by some boys playing in the street. One of the boys, an alert little fellow, said: "I will be the burgomaster; you come to me with your cases and I will judge them." He sat on a stone; another boy approached him, bowed to him, and said: "I loaned money to this peasant, and he has not paid me back; I have come to Your Honor to complain about him." "Did you borrow money from him?" the burgomaster asked the defendant. "I did." "Then why don't you pay it back?" "I have nothing to pay it with, little father." "Listen, plaintiff! Since the defendant does not deny having borrowed money from you, and since he cannot pay, extend the term of the debt for five or six years; by that time he may come into money and if so he will repay the debt with interest. Do you agree?" The two boys bowed to the burgomaster and said: "Thank you, little father, we agree." The judge heard all this, was overjoyed, and said: "This boy has enlightened me! I will tell my plaintiffs to give the poor man an extension of time." Upon his advice, the rich neighbors agreed to wait for two or three years, in the hope that by then the peasant would have bettered his lot. 
 The poor man again went to the forest for wood and chopped half a cartful, and then night came. He remained in the woods, intending to return home in the morning with a full cart. He wondered where he would spend the night. The forest was deserted, and teeming with wild beasts; if he lay beside his horse, 
 
 they might devour him. He went deeper into the thicket and climbed into a big pine tree. At night seven robbers came there and said: "Open, open, little gate!" At once a little gate leading underground opened; the robbers carried in their loot, and when all was hidden, said: "Close, close, little gate!" The gate closed, and the robbers left to get more loot. The peasant saw all this. When everything around him was quiet, he climbed down from the tree, thinking, "Let me try-maybe the gate will open for me too." He had no sooner said, "Open, open, little gate," than it opened. He entered the cave and saw piles of gold, silver, and all sorts of other valuable objects lying around. The poor man rejoiced, and at daybreak began to drag away the bags of money; he threw away his wood, loaded his cart with silver and gold, and hastened home. 
 His wife went out to meet him. "Oh, little husband, I nearly died of grief, worrying about you! I thought that a tree had crushed you or that wild beasts had devoured you." But the peasant said happily: "Cheer up, my wife! God gave me luck. I found a treasure; help me to carry these bags." After the bags were carried in, he went to his rich brother, told him about everything, and invited him to accompany him on another trip to the cave. The brother agreed; they went together to the woods, found the pine tree, and cried: "Open, open, little gate!" And the little gate opened. They set about dragging out bags of money; the poor brother filled his cart and was satisfied, but the rich brother could not tear himself away. "Well, little brother," he said, "you go home, I shall soon follow you." "Very well! But don't forget to say: 'Close, close, little gate!' " "I won't." The poor man left, but the rich man could not get enough of the treasure; it was impossible to take everything at once, and to leave it was a pity. Night overtook him in the same place. The robbers arrived, found him in the cave, and cut off his head. They removed their bags from the cart, put the slain man in it, lashed the horse, and set it loose. The horse ran out of the woods and brought him home. The robber chieftain chided the robber who had killed the rich brother. "Why did you kill him prematurely? You should have asked him first where he lived, for much of our goods is missing and probably 
 
 he stole it! How can we find it now?" The chieftain's assistant said: "Let the man who killed him look for him!" 
 Shortly afterward, the murderer began to scout for the gold. He came to the poor man's little store; he bought a thing or two, noticed that the storekeeper was dejected, and asked him: "Why are you so sad?" He answered: "I had an elder brother, but misfortune came; someone killed him. The day before yesterday his horse brought him home with his head cut off, and he was buried today." The robber saw that he was on the right track and, pretending to be very sorry, began to investigate., Upon learning that the slain man had left a widow, he asked: "Has his widow at least a roof over her head?" "Oh, yes, she has a big house." "Where? Show it to me." The peasant showed him his brother's house; the robber took some red paint and marked the door. "What are you doing that for?" the peasant asked him. He answered: "I want to help the widow, and I have made that sign in order to find her house more easily." "Eh, brother, my sister-in-law needs no help; thank God, she has enough of everything." "And where do you live?" "Here is my hut!" The robber made the same sign on his door too. "And what is that for?" "I like you very much," said the robber. "The next time I come here, I will stop at your house to spend the night; believe me, brother, you will profit by it." The robber returned to his band, related all that had happened, and they decided to rob and kill everyone in the houses of the two brothers and recover their gold. 
 Meanwhile the poor man came home and said: "I have just made the acquaintance of a young fellow who smeared my door with paint and said that he would stop in my house to spend the night whenever he was in this village. He is so kind-hearted! How sorry he was for my brother, how he wanted to help my sister-in-law!" His wife and son listened in silence, but his adopted daughter said to him: "My father, didn't you make a mistake? Perhaps the same robbers who killed my uncle have now discovered that their gold is missing and are trying to find us. Now they may come and rob us, and you won't escape death." The peasant was frightened. "That is quite possible! After all, I never saw the man before. What a misfor- 
 
 tune! What shall we do?" His daughter said: "Take some paint and smear the same signs on all the doors in the neighborhood." The peasant did this. When the robbers came they could not find anything; they went back and thrashed their scout for not having made the signs properly. Finally they decided that they had been outwitted by a clever person, and after a while prepared seven barrels; they put a robber in each of them, except one that they filled with oil. 
 The former scout took these barrels straight to the poor brother's house; he arrived at sunset and asked whether he could stay overnight. The poor brother welcomed him as a friend. The daughter went to the yard and began to inspect the barrels; she opened one, and found oil; she tried to open another, but could not; she put her ear to it and heard someone stirring and breathing inside. "Ah," she thought, "that's an evil ruse!" She came into the house and said: "Father, we must treat our guest; I will make a fire in the stove and prepare something for supper." "Very well," the poor man said. The daughter made a fire in the stove and while cooking supper, she boiled water and poured it into the barrels, thus scalding the six robbers to death. Her father and his guest ate supper, and the daughter sat in the back room waiting to see what would happen next. When the hosts went to bed, the guest went out into the yard and whistled. No one answered; he approached the barrels, and steam came out of them. The robber guessed what had happened, harnessed his horses, and left with the barrels. 
 The daughter closed the door, went to rouse her family, and told them what she had done. Her father said: "Well, little daughter, you have saved our lives, now be my son's lawful wife." There was a gay feast and a wedding. The young bride kept telling her father that he should sell his old house and buy a new one, for she was very much afraid of the robbers, who might return sooner or later. And her fears came true. After some time, the same robber who had come with the barrels disguised himself as an officer, came to the peasant's house, and asked whether he could spend the night. He was admitted. No one guessed anything, but the young bride recognized him 
 
 and said: "Father, this is the same robber who came before." "No, my daughter, it is not." She did not answer; but when bedtime came, she put a sharp ax beside her and stayed awake all night watching. In the middle of the night the pretended officer rose, took his saber, and was about to cut off her husband's head. She did not lose her presence of mind, but swung her ax and cut off his right hand; then she swung again and cut off his head. Her father now realized that his daughter was really very wise; he followed her advice, sold his old house, and bought himself a hostelry. He moved to his new residence and began to prosper and increase his trade. 
 His neighbors, the same who had given him money and later sued him in court, stopped at his hostelry. "Hey, how do you happen to be here?" "This is my house, I bought it recently." "It's a magnificent house! Apparently you are in money. Why don't you pay your debts?" The host bowed and said: "Thank God! The Lord has been good to me, I found a treasure, and I am ready to pay you even threefold." "Very well, brother. Let us now celebrate the housewarming!" "You are welcome." So they had a good time. 
 And near the house there was a beautiful garden. "May we look at your garden?" "With pleasure, gentlemen-I will accompany you." They walked and walked in the garden and in a remote corner found a tubful of ashes. When the host saw it he gasped: "Gentlemen, this is the same tub that my wife sold." "Let us see whether the money is not in the ashes." They shook the tub and found the money. Then the neighbors believed that the peasant had told them the truth. "Let us examine the trees in the woods," they said. "The raven who snatched the cap must have built a nest in it." They walked and walked, saw a nest, pulled it down with hooks, and there was the cap! They threw out the nest and found the money. The host paid his debt to his neighbors and began to live in prosperity and happiness. 
