
 IN THE heavens a bright new moon was born, and on earth, in the house of Leonti, the old priest of the cathedral, a son, a mighty hero. He was named Aliosha Popovich, a fine name. He was given meat and drink, and in one day he grew as much as other babes in a week; in one week he was as others at the end of a year. Soon he began to walk in the streets and to play with other little children. If he grasped someone by the arm, the arm came off; if he grasped someone by the leg, the leg came off; terrible were his games. If he took a man by the body, he pulled off his belly. Then Aliosha came of age and asked his father and mother to give him their blessing and their permission to try his luck in the field of battle. His father answered: "Aliosha Popovich, you are going into the field of battle; there are mightier men than you on this earth; therefore, take Maryshko Paranov's son as your faithful servant." So the brave knights mounted their good steeds; and as they rode off into the great world, a pillar of dust smoked behind them, and they were gone. 
 Soon the brave knights came to the realm of Prince Vladimir. Aliosha Popovich went straight to the prince's white stone palace, crossed himself as is prescribed, and bowed, as he had been taught, to all four sides, and to Prince Vladimir in addition. Prince Vladimir welcomed them, bade them sit down at the oaken table, and gave them meat and drink before he questioned them. They ate marvelous gingerbreads, washing them down with heady wines. Then Prince Vladimir asked them: "Who are you, brave youths? Are you bold and mighty heroes, or chance travelers, untrustworthy persons? I know neither your names nor your fathers' names." Aliosha Popovich answered: "I am the son of Leonti, the old priest of the cathedral, and my name is Aliosha Popovich; here by my side is my servant, Maryshko Paranov's son." When he had eaten and drunk his fill, Aliosha Popovich went to the brick stove 
 
 to rest, for it was after midday, but Maryshko Paranov's son remained seated at the table. 
 At that time Tugarin Zmeevich, Son of the Dragon, a mighty champion, invaded and scourged Prince Vladimir's kingdom. Tugarin Zmeevich came to Prince Vladimir's white stone palace; with one stride of his left leg he crossed the threshold; with one stride of his right leg he reached the oaken table; he ate and drank and embraced the princess. He made mock of Prince Vladimir; he put one loaf of bread in one cheek, and another in the other cheek, and then he put a whole swan on his tongue, pushed it in with a pancake, and swallowed everything in one gulp. 
 Aliosha, who was lying on the brick stove, spoke these words to Tugarin Zmeevich: "My father, the old priest Leonti, once had a big cow, a gluttonous cow that went from brewery to brewery and drank whole barrels of beer and their dregs. Then this big cow, this gluttonous cow, went to a iake and drank all the water from it, and suddenly she burst-and so may you, Tugarin Zmeevich, burst at this table!" Tugarin became enraged at Aliosha Popovich and hurled a steel knife at him, but Aliosha Popovich was quick and dodged behind an oaken pillar. Then Aliosha spoke these words: "Thanks, Tugarin Zmeevich, mighty champion, for giving me thy steel knife, with it I will cut open thy white breast, dim thy bright eyes, and behold thy fiery heart." 
 As Aliosha said these words, Maryshko Paranov's son jumped from behind the oaken table onto his nimble feet, grabbed Tugarin by the neck, pulled him from the table, and hurled him against the white wall. The glass windows were shattered in splinters. Aliosha Popovich spoke up from the brick stove: "O you, Maryshko Paranov's son, faithful and devoted servant!" Maryshko Paranov's son answered: "Give me the steel knife, Aliosha Popovich; I will cut open Tugarin's white breast, dim his bright eyes, and behold his fiery heart." Aliosha answered from the brick stove: "O Maryshko Paranov's son, do not befoul this white stone palace. Let him go into the open field; there we shall meet him tomorrow and give him battle." 
 
 
 
 Next day Maryshko Paranov's son rose at the very break of dawn and led the spirited horses out to drink water at the swift-flowing stream. Tugarin, the dragon's son, flew through the air and challenged Aliosha Popovich to come to the open field. And Maryshko Paranov's son came to Aliosha Popovich saying: "God be thy judge, Aliosha Popovich, that thou gavest me not the steel knife; I would have cut open this knave's white breast, I would have dimmed his bright eyes and beheld his fiery heart. Now what will you take from this Tugarin? He is flying through the air." Aliosha spoke these words: "If I do not triumph, heaven is betrayed." 
 Aliosha brought forth his good steed, saddled him with a Circassian saddle, tightened it with twelve silken girths, not for beauty's sake, but for strength, and went to the open field. He rode all around it and beheld Tugarin Zmeevich flying through the air. And Aliosha Popovich made this prayer: "Holy Mother of God, send me a black cloud, and send a pelting rain from the black cloud to wet Tugarin's paper wings!" Aliosha's prayer reached heaven; a threatening black cloud rolled over the sky, from it God made a heavy pelting rain to fall, and Tugarin's paper wings wilted; he fell to the damp earth and rode into the open field. 
 Like two mountains rolling together, so did Tugarin and Aliosha meet. They clashed with their maces; the maces broke at the handles. They clashed with their spears; the spears twisted on their staves. They swung their sabers; the sabers broke. Aliosha fell from his saddle like a sheaf of oats, and Tugarin Zmeevich began to smite him, but Aliosha was quick and dodged under the horse's belly. Then he crawled out from under the horse's belly on the other side and struck Tugarin with his knife under the right breast, and threw him down from his good steed, and began to shout at him: "Thanks, Tugarin Zmeevich, for thy steel knife; I will cut open thy white breast, I will dim thy bright eyes, I will behold thy fiery heart." 
 And Aliosha cut off Tugarin's rash head, and carried it to Prince Vladimir. He rode and he played with the head, tossing it high in the air and catching it on the tip of his spear. Looking from afar, Vladimir took fright. "Behold Tugarin carrying Aliosha's rash head!" he said. "Now in sooth he will enslave our Christian kingdom!" Maryshko Paranov's son answered: "Grieve not, Vladimir, our little red sun, our prince of the capital city of Kiev! If the foul Tugarin rides on the ground and flies not through the air, he will lose his rash head by my steel spear. Be not distressed, Prince Vladimir. When the time comes, I shall fight him." 
 Then Maryshko Paranov's son looked into the spyglass and recognized Aliosha Popovich. "I know him by his mighty gait and his heroic posture," he said. "It is Aliosha turning his steed sharply, tossing the head high and catching it on the tip of his spear. It is not the foul Tugarin riding yonder, but Aliosha Popovich, the son of Leonti, the old priest of the cathedral. And on his spear he carries the head of the foul Tugarin Zmeevich." 
 
 
