
 In the famous city of Kiev, in Tsar Vladimir's castle, dukes and boyars and mighty champions assembled for a solemn feast. Tsar Vladimir spoke these words: "Hail, boys! Gather together, sit down around one table." They gathered around one table, ate and drank half their £dl, and Tsar Vladimir spoke: "Who would render me a great service? Who would go beyond thrice nine lands, to the thrice tenth kingdom, to the Turkish sultan, and take his steed with the golden mane, kill his talking cat, and spit in the sultan's own face?" The brave knight Ilya Muromets, son of Ivan, offered to go. Tsar Vladimir had a beloved daughter, and she said these words: "My father, Tsar Vladimir, although Ilya Muromets is boasting loud, he will not perform this task. Disband the solemn feast, father; go to all the taverns in your town and seek the young Baldak, son of Boris, seven years of age." 
 And the tsar heeded his daughter, and went to seek the young Baldak Borisievich, and found him in a tavern sleeping under a bench. The tsar pushed him with the toe of his boot and Baldak jumped up from his sleep, as though nothing had happened. "Hail, Tsar Vladimir, what do you want of me?" Whereupon Tsar Vladimir answered: "I invite you to the solemn feast." "I am not worthy to go to the solemn feast; I get drunk in taverns and wallow on the floor." Tsar Vladimir spoke these words to him: "If I invite you to the feast, you must come; we have great need of you." And young Baldak Borisievich bade the tsar return from the tavern to the royal castle, and said that he himself would soon follow. 
 Baldak remained alone in the tavern, drank enough green wine to chase away his drunkenness, and went without delay to the castle of Tsar Vladimir. He crossed himself as was prescribed, bowed low as he had been taught, bowed to all sides, and in addition to the Tsar himself. "Hail, Tsar Vladimir," he said. "Why have you bidden me to this feast?" Tsar Vladimir answered him: "Young Baldak Borisievich, render me a 
 
 great service. Go beyond thrice nine lands, to the thrice tenth kingdom, to the Turkish sultan. Take from him his steed with the golden mane, kill his talking cat, and spit in the sultan's own face. Take as many troops as you need, take as much gold as you please!" And young Baldak Borisievich answered: "As you have commanded, Tsar Vladimir! For my troops give me only twenty-nine youths. I myself will be the thirtieth." 
 Speedily a tale is spun, with less speed a deed is done. Young Baldak Borisievich set out on his way to the Turkish sultan and managed to arrive just at midnight. He entered the sultan's courtyard, took the steed with the golden mane from the stables, seized the talking cat and tore him in twain, and spat in the sultan's own face. And the sultan also had a favorite garden, which extended for three versts; all kinds of tree were planted in this garden, all kinds of flower grew in it. Young Baldak Borisievich ordered his companions, the twenty-nine youths, to cut down the entire garden; he himself fetched fire and with this fire razed everything to the ground. Where the garden had been he pitched thirty thin white canvas tents. 
 Early in the morning the Turkish sultan awoke; his first glance went to his favorite garden, and as soon as he looked he saw that all the trees had been cut down and burned, and that thirty white canvas tents stood where the garden had been. "Who has thus trespassed upon my garden?" he thought. "An emperor, a king, or a very mighty champion?" The sultan cried in a loud voice for his favorite Turkish pasha, called him before him, and spoke these words: "My kingdom fares ill! I have been expecting a Russian villain, young Baldak Borisievich, and now I am invaded-by whom? An emperor, a king, or a mighty champion? I do not know, nor do I know how to find out." 
 As he took counsel, the eldest daughter of the Turkish sultan appeared and said to her father: "What are you holding council about, and what is it that you cannot find out? O Father, Turkish sultan! Give me your blessing and order that twenty-nine maidens, the most beautiful in the whole kingdom, be chosen! I myself will be the thirtieth. We will go to spend the night in those canvas tents and will find the culprit for you." And her 
 
 father consented and she went to the tents with twenty-nine maidens, the most beautiful in the kingdom. Young Baldak Borisievich came out to meet her, took her by her white hands, and cried in his loud voice: "Eh you youths, my companions! Take the lovely maidens by their hands, lead them to your tents, and do what you know how to do." They slept together one night. Next morning the sultan's eldest daughter returned to him and said: "My beloved father, order the thirty youths from the white canvas tents to come to your house; I myself will point out the culprit." 
 Straightway the Turkish sultan sent his favorite pasha to the tents to summon to him young Baldak Borisievich with all his companions. The thirty youths came out of their tents: they were all of one face, like blood brothers, hair for hair, voice for voice! And they spoke these words to the envoy: "Go back, we shall soon follow you." Young Baldak Borisievich asked his boys: "Is there not some sign on me? Examine me carefully." And they found that his legs were smeared with gold up to the knees, and his arms with silver up to the elbows. "She is cunning, but I understand her stratagem," said Baldak, and put the same signs on all his companions: their legs were now gold up to the knees and their arms silver up to the elbows. He ordered them to put on gloves. "Let no one," he commanded, "take them off without my order when we arrive in the sultan's house." 
 Now they arrived at the sultan's house. The eldest daughter came forth and pointed out young Baldak Borisievich as the culprit. Baldak said to her: "How do you recognize me-by what proof?" The sultan's eldest daughter answered: "Remove your boots from your legs, and your gloves from your hands: there I have put my signs. Your legs are gold up to the knees, your arms silver up to the elbows." "Have we not many such youths?" said young Baldak Borisievich, and gave an order to his boys: "Let everyone remove a boot from one leg, and a glove from one hand!" The same signs that he had were found on everyone-the chambers were illumined by the brightness of the silver and gold. And the Turkish sultan was merciful and kind, and did not believe his daughter. "You lie," he said. 
 
 "I need one culprit, and now, according to you, there are thirty culprits!" And the Turkish sultan commanded: "Get out, all of you!" 
 Thereupon he became even more distressed and aggrieved, and again began to think and to take counsel with his favorite pasha about how to discover the culprit. To their meeting came the sultan's second daughter and said to him: "Father, give me twenty-nine maidens; I myself will be the thirtieth. I will go to the white canvas tents, spend one night there, and discover the culprit for you." No sooner said than done. Next morning the Turkish sultan sent his favorite pasha to summon young Baldak Borisievich and his companions to his palace. As before, Baldak answered: "Go back, we shall soon follow you." As soon as the pasha left, young Baldak cried in his loud voice: "Come out of the tents, all of you, my companions, you twenty-nine youths! See whether there is a sign on me. Straightway they all came out of the tents and found golden hair on his head. Young Baldak Borisievich said: "She is cunning, but I understand her stratagem." He put golden hair on all the youths, just as had been done to him, and ordered them to cover their rash heads with caps. "Let no one," he warned, "remove them without my order when we are in the Turkish sultan's palace." 
 As soon as young Baldak Borisievich and his companions entered the sultan's palace, the sultan said to his second daughter: "My beloved daughter, show me the culprit." And she knew with certainty who it was, because she had spent the night with him; she walked straight to young Baldak and said: "Here is the culprit." To this young Baldak Borisievich answered: "How do you recognize me-by what proof?" "Remove your cap from your head: there I have made a sign- golden hair." "Have we not many such youths?" answered Baldak, and ordered all his boys to throw down their caps. Their golden hair appeared, and the chambers were illumined! The sultan grew angry at his second daughter: "You do not speak the truth! I need one culprit, and according to you all of them are culprits!" And he commanded her: "Leave my palace!" 
 Now the Turkish sultan was even more distressed and ag- 
 
 grieved than before. But his third and youngest daughter came forth, chided her two elder sisters, and begged her father: "My beloved father, order me to choose twenty-nine maidens, the loveliest in the kingdom. I myself will be the thirtieth, and will find the culprit." The sultan acceded to the request of his youngest daughter, and she went to the same tents to spend the night. Baldak Borisievich jumped out of his tent, took the sultan's daughter by her white hands, and led her to his tent. And to his youths he cried in a loud voice: "My boys, take the lovely maidens by the hands and lead them to your tents." The maidens spent the night there and next morning went home. The sultan sent his favorite pasha for the good youths. The envoy went to the white canvas tents and summoned young Baldak and bis companions to the Turkish sultan himself. "Go back, we shall soon follow you," was the reply. Young Baldak Borisievich spoke to his companions: "Well, boys, see whether there is a sign on me." They looked and searched all over him, but could not find any sign. "Ah brothers, it looks as if I am lost now," said Baldak, and asked them to render him a last service. He gave them each a sharp saber and told them to conceal the weapons under their clothes. "And when I give the signal," he bade them, "cut in all directions!" 
 As soon as they came before the Turkish sultan, the youngest daughter came forth and pointed at young Baldak. "Here is the culprit!" she said. "He has a golden star under his heel." And a golden star was found under his heel just as she had said. The sultan sent all of the twenty-nine youths out of his palace, and held only the culprit, young Baldak, son of Boris, and cried to him in a loud, shrill voice: "I will take you, put you on the palm of one hand, and clap with the other. There will be nothing left of you but a moist spot." Young Baldak answered him: "0 Turkish sultan! Emperors, kings, and mighty heroes fear you, but I, a seven-year-old boy, do not fear you. I took your steed with the golden mane, I killed your talking cat, spat in your own face, and cut and burned your favorite garden!" The sultan fell into an even greater rage than before and ordered his servants to set up in the square two oaken pillars with a maplewood crossbeam, and to prepare three 
 
 nooses on this crossbeam-the first of silk, the second of hemp, and the third of bast. And he proclaimed through the whole town that all the people, big and little, should assemble on the square to see how the Russian culprit would be put to death. 
 The Turkish sultan himself got into a light carriage and took with him his favorite pasha and his youngest daughter, who had discovered the culprit. Young Baldak was tied and chained and placed at their feet, and all of them drove straight to the oaken pillars. On the way young Baldak spoke thus: "I will propose riddles, and you, Turkish sultan, shall guess them. A horse runs fast. Why does his tail drag?" "What a blockhead you are," answered the sultan. "Every horse is born with a tail." They drove a little farther, and Baldak spoke again: "The front wheels are moved by the horse, but why the devil do the back wheels roll?" "What a blockhead! In sight of death he has lost his mind and is all confused! The master made the four wheels, so four wheels roll." They arrived at the square and got out of the carriage. They took the culprit, untied him and unchained him, and led him to the gallows. 
 Young Baldak Borisievich made the sign of the cross, bowed low to all sides, and spoke in a loud voice: "O Turkish sultan, do not give the order that I be hanged, order me to speak." "Speak! What is it?" "I have a gift from my father, a blessing from my mother: a playing horn. Order me to play it for the last time." Young Baldak played a gay tune, and everyone's mind was clouded; people became absorbed in looking at him and listening to him, and forgot why they had come; the sultan's tongue could not move. The twenty-nine youths heard the horn, came from the back rows, and began to cut down all the people with their sharp sabers. Young Baldak played until his companions had cut down all the crowd and reached the gallows. 
 Then young Baldak, son of Boris, ceased playing and said these last words to the Turkish sultan: "Aren't you the blockhead rather than I? Turn around, look behind you. My geese are pecking your wheat!" The Turkish sultan turned around and saw that all his people were slain and lying on the ground, and that at the gallows only three Were left-himself, his 
 
 daughter, and his favorite pasha. Young Baldak ordered his youths to hang the sultan with the silken noose, his favorite pasha with the hempen noose, and his youngest daughter with the noose of bast. With this they had finished their enterprise, and departed for the famous city of Kiev, to return to Tsar Vladimir himself. 
 
 
