
 Once there was a peasant who had a good dog, but when the beast grew old he ceased to bark and to guard the house and barn. The peasant did not want to give him any more bread to eat and drove him away from the farm. The dog went to the woods and lay down under a tree to die. Suddenly a bear came and asked: "Why have you lain down here, dog?" "I have come here to die of hunger. For this is human justice nowadays, you see: while you have your strength, they give you food and drink, but when your strength vanishes with old age, they drive you out." "Well, dog, are you hungry?" "Very hungry." "Then come with me, I will feed you." They went off together and met a colt. "Look at me," said the bear to the dog and began to tear the ground with his paws. "Dog, dog!" The dog asked him: "What is it?" "Tell me whether my eyes are red." "They are red, bear." The bear began to tear the ground even more furiously. "Dog, dog," he said, "is my fur bristling?" "It is bristling, bear." "Dog, dog, is my tail up?" "It is up." Then the bear seized the colt by his belly; the colt dropped to the ground and the bear tore him to pieces and said: "Now, dog, eat as much as you want. And when you have finished the meat, come to see me." 
 The dog lived a carefree life, and when he had eaten up everything and was hungry again, he ran to the bear. "Well, brother," the bear asked, "did you eat him up?" "I did, but lately I have felt hungry again." "Why be hungry? Do you know where your women are reaping?" "I know." "Well, let us go. I will sneak up to your master's wife and steal her child from the cradle, and you run after me and rescue it. When you rescue it, take it back, and for that service she will again give you bread as of old." So far, so good; the bear sneaked up and carried off the child from the cradle. The child began to cry, the women ran after the bear; but 
 
 no matter how much they ran, they could not overtake him. They turned back; the mother wept, the other women were distressed. Suddenly the dog appeared, overtook the bear, rescued the child, and brought it back. "Look," said the women, "the old dog has rescued the child!" They ran to meet him. The mother was happy, very happy. "Now," she said, "I will not give up that dog for anything." She led him home, poured milk for him, crumbled some bread into it, and gave it to him, saying: "Here, eat!" And to her husband she said: "Now, little husband, we must feed and take care of our dog. He rescued my child from the bear-and you said that he had no strength." The dog recovered his strength and grew fat. "May God," he said, "give health to the bear! He did not let me die of starvation." He became the bear's best friend. 
 One day the peasant had a party. At that time the bear came to visit the dog. "Good evening, dog!" he said. "How are you, do you have enough bread?" "Thank God," said the dog, "I'm living in clover. What shall I offer you? Let us go to the house; my masters are reveling and they won't see you if you enter and hide at once under the stove. Then I'll get something and give you a treat." So they stole into the house. The dog saw that the guests and the hosts were quite tipsy, and began to treat his friend. The bear drank one glass, then a second, and the liquor went to his head. The guests intoned a song, and the bear wanted to sing too. He began to sing a song of his own, but the dog begged him: "Please! Do not sing or there will be trouble." But his pleadings were of no avail-the bear refused to be silent and sang his song ever more loudly. The guests heard the howl, picked up some stakes, and began to thrash the bear; he wrested himself free and took to his heels-he barely got away with his life. 
 Now this peasant also had a cat; she ceased catching mice and became mischievous-wherever she went, she broke something or spilled something from the pitcher. The peasant drove the cat from his house, and the dog seeing that she was hungry, began quietly to take bread and meat to her and to feed her. The peasant's wife began to watch; when she saw what was going on she began to beat the dog; she beat and beat him, 
 
 repeating: "Don't take ham to the cat, don't bring her bread." After about three days the dog went out of the yard and saw that the cat was dying of hunger. "What is the matter with you?" he asked. "I am dying of hunger; I was full only so long as you fed me." "Come with me." They went off, and came up to a drove of horses. The dog began to dig the ground with his paws, and said: "Cat, cat, are my eyes red?" "They are not red a bit." "Say that they are red!" The cat said: "They are red." "Cat, cat, is my fur bristling?" "No, it is not bristling." "You fool, say that it is bristling!" "Well, then, it is bristling." "Cat, cat, is my tail up?" "Not a bit." "You fool, say that it is up." "Very well, then, it is up." The dog jumped at a mare, and the mare gave him such a kick that he gave up the ghost. And the cat said: "Now his eyes are really full of blood, his fur is bristling, and his tail is all twisted. Good-by, brother dog! I myself shall go away to die." 
 
 

 
