
 A certain miller had a laborer. He sent this laborer to throw wheat into the hopper, but instead the fellow strewed it on the millstone. The mill began to turn and all the wheat was scattered. When the miller came to the mill and saw the scattered wheat, he drove the laborer away. The laborer set out for his own village, but got lost on the way. He went into some bushes and lay down to sleep. A wolf came; seeing that the laborer was asleep, he came closer and began to sniff him, but the laborer snatched the wolf by his tail, killed him, and skinned him. 
 The laborer went up a hill and on the hill stood an empty mill; he decided to spend the night in this mill. Three brigands 
 
 came there; they lit a fire and began to divide their booty. One of them said: "I'll put my share underneath the mill." The second said: "I'll shove mine under the wheel." And the third said: "I'll hide mine in the hopper." But our laborer was lying in the hopper, and fearing that the brigands would kill him, he thought that he should try to frighten them. So he cried: "Hey, you there, go down! And you, strike from the side. And you, hit from there, while I strike from here! Stop them, boys! Get at them, boys!" The brigands took fright, threw down their plunder, and ran away. 
 The laborer crawled out of the hopper, gathered his booty, went home, and told his father and mother: "Here is everything I earned at the mill. Now let us go to market, buy ourselves a gun, and go hunting." They went to market, bought a gun, and on their way back the laborer said to bis father: "Look sharp to see whether we meet a hare, a fox, or perhaps even a marten." The two men dozed as they drove and finally fell asleep. Two wolves came, killed their horse, and devoured it entirely. The father awoke and lashed out with his whip-at his horse, as he thought, but actually he hit the wolf. The wolf got into the horse's collar and began to drag the cart and the father began to drive it. The other wolf tried to seize the laborer from behind. This wolf had a deep scar. The laborer lashed the wolf with his whip and the knot of his whip got stuck in the wolf's scar. The laborer dragged him after his cart, so that one wolf pulled the cart while the other ran behind it. They came home; their dog ran out barking wildly. The wolves took fright; the one made a sharp turn, overturning the cart and spilling the father and son on the ground. The other wolf jumped out of the horse collar and the laborer dropped his whip; the two wolves ran away and the old man and the laborer were left with nothing. 
 They were well off indeed! Their yard was in the form of a circle. Three birch poles stood in it. The poles were tied by their tops. Three stakes were driven into the ground. Three twigs were wound around the stakes. The sky covered their estate from above and the whole world inclosed it! 
 
 
