

 ONCE there WAS an old man who had a cat and a cock. The old man went to work in the woods; the cat brought him some food and the cock was left to watch the house. Just then a fox came to the house. 
 Cock-a-doodle-doo, little cock, 
 Golden crest! 
 Look out the window 
 And I'll give you a pea. 
 Thus sang the fox as he sat under the window. The cock opened the window and poked out his head to see who was singing. The fox snatched the cock in his claws and carried him 
 
 off to eat him for dinner. The cock cried out: "The fox is carrying me away, he is carrying the cock beyond dark forests, into distant lands, into foreign countries, beyond thrice nine lands, into the thirtieth kingdom and the thrice tenth empire! Cat Cotonaevich, rescue me!" In the field the cat heard the cock's voice, rushed after him, overtook the fox, rescued the cock, and brought him home. "Now mind, Petya," said the cat to the cock, "don't look out of the window again, don't trust the fox; he'll eat you up, bones and all!" 
 Once again the old man went to work in the woods and the cat went to bring him food. Before leaving, the old man told the cock to watch the house and not to look out of the window. But the fox was wily, he wanted very badly to eat the cock; so he came to the hut and began to sing: 
 Cock-a-doodle-doo, little cock, Golden crest! Look out the window And I'll give you a pea- I'll give you seeds too. 
 The cock walked about the room and did not answer. Once again the fox sang his song and cast a pea in through the window. The cock ate the pea and said: "No, fox, you cannot fool me! You want to eat me, bones and all." "Don't say such things, Petya. I have no idea of eating you. I just wanted you to pay me a visit, to see my house and take a walk around my estate." And he sang again: 
 Cock-a-doodle-doo, little cock, Golden crest! I gave you a pea, I'll give you seeds too. 
 The cock looked out of the window and at once the fox snatched him in his claws. The cock cried in a shrill voice: "The fox is carrying me off, carrying the cock beyond dark woods, beyond thick forests, along steep banks, up high mountains! He wants to eat me, bones and all!" In the field the cat heard him, rushed after him, rescued him, and brought him 
 
 home. "Did I not tell you not to open the window, not to poke out your head, or the fox would eat you, bones and all? Listen now, heed my words! Tomorrow we shall be even farther away." 
 Again the old man went to work and again the cat went to bring him his food. The fox stole under the window and began to sing the same song; he sang it three times, but the cock remained silent. The fox said: "What's the matter, has Petya become dumb?" "No, fox, you cannot fool me, I won't look out of the window." The fox cast a pea and several wheat grains in at the window and again sang: 
 Cock-a-doodle-doo, little cock, 
 Golden crest, 
 Butter head, 
 Look out the window! 
 I have a big mansion: 
 In every corner 
 There's a measure of wheat; 
 Eat your fill! 
 Then he added: "And, Petya, you should also see my collection of curios! Don't believe the cat; if I wanted to eat you, I would have done so long ago. The truth is, I like you, I want to show you the world, to develop your mind, to teach you how to live. Now show yourself, Petya! I'll go behind a corner," and he concealed himself closer to the wall. The cock jumped up on a bench and looked through the window from a distance; he wanted to see whether the fox was still there. Then he poked his head out of the window, and at once the fox snatched him and darted off. The cock sang the same tune as before, but the cat did not hear him. The fox carried the cock away and ate him up behind a fir grove, leaving only his tail feathers for the wind to scatter. The old man and the cat came home and discovered that the cock was gone. They were deeply distressed and said to each other: "This is what comes of not heeding warnings!" 
 
 
