
 A SOLDIER HAD served in his regiment for fully twenty-five years without ever having seen the tsar in person. When he returned home and was questioned about the tsar, he did not know what to say. His parents and friends began to taunt him. "You served for twenty-five years," they said, "yet you never saw the tsar." The soldier felt humiliated, so he made ready and went to have a look at the tsar. He came to the palace. The tsar asked him: "What have you come for, soldier?" "Your Majesty, I served you and God for a full twenty-five years, yet I never saw you in person; so I have come to look at you." "Well, look your fill." The soldier walked around the tsar three times examining him. The tsar said: "Am I handsome?" "Yes, Your Majesty," answered the soldier. "And now, soldier, tell me-is it far from heaven to earth?" "It is so far that when a noise is made there, we can hear it here." "And is the earth wide?" "The sun rises over there and sets over here: that's the width of the earth." "And is the earth deep?" "I had a grandfather who died about ninety years ago. He was buried in the earth and since then has never come home; so it must be deep." Then the tsar sent the soldier to prison, saying: "Keep your eyes open, soldier! I will send you thirty geese; try to pluck a feather out of each one." "Very well," the soldier said. 
 The tsar summoned thirty wealthy merchants and proposed the same riddles to them that he had proposed to the soldier; they racked their brains but were unable to answer the questions, and the tsar ordered them to be put in prison. The soldier asked them: "Honorable merchants, why have you been imprisoned?" "The tsar asked us how far heaven is from earth, how wide the earth is, and how deep it is; but we are uneducated people and could not find the answers." "If each one of you will give me a thousand rubles, I will tell you the answers." "Gladly, brother, only tell us." 
 The soldier took a thousand rubles from each and told them how to solve the tsar's riddles. Two days later the tsar sum- 
 
 moned the merchants and the soldier before him; he proposed the same riddles to the merchants, and as soon as they answered correctly, he let them go. Then he said to the soldier: "Well, have you managed to pluck a feather from each?" "Yes, Your Majesty, and it was a golden feather, too." "And how far is it to your home?" "It cannot be seen from here, so it must be far." "Here is a thousand rubles for you; God speed you." The soldier returned home and began to live a carefree and easy life. 
