
 Once there lived an old man and his wife. They were poor, very poor people. They had no bread; so they went to the woods, gathered acorns, brought them home, and began to eat them. They ate for a long time or a short time, but at one point the old woman let an acorn fall and it dropped into the cellar. The acorn struck root and in a short time grew as high as the floor. The old woman noticed this and said: "Old man, we must cut the floor. Let the oak grow higher; once it has grown, we shall not have to go to the woods to pick acorns, we shall gather them at home." The old man cut the floor; the tree grew and grew till it reached the ceiling. The old man hammered out the ceiling, and later removed the roof; the tree kept on growing and growing till it reached the sky. The 
 
 old man and woman had by now eaten up their supply of acorns, so the old man took a bag and climbed up the tree. 
 He climbed and climbed and finally reached the sky. He walked and walked there and finally saw a little cock with a golden crest, a buttery head, and a hand mill stood near by. The old man did not think too much about it; he simply took the cock and the hand mill and climbed down to his house. When he reached the ground he said: "Now, old woman, what shall we do, what shall we eat?" "Wait," said the old woman, "let me try the hand mill." She took the hand mill and began to grind: at each turn a pancake and a pie came out, at each turn a pancake and a pie. And she fed the old man his fill. 
 A certain nobleman drove by and stopped at the old couple's house. "Do you have anything to eat?" he asked. The old woman said: "What shall I give you, my good man? Would you like some pancakes?" She took the hand mill and turned the handle: pancakes and pies fell out. The traveler ate them and said: "Grandmother, sell me your hand mill." "No," said the old woman, "it is not for sale." So the guest stole her hand mill. When the old man and woman discovered the theft, they began to grieve greatly. "Wait," said Little Cock Golden Crest, "I will fly after the thief and catch him." He came to the boyar's house, perched on the gate, and crowed: "Cock-a-doodle-doo! Boyar, boyar, give us back our sky blue golden hand mill! Boyar, boyar, give us back our sky blue golden hand mill!" When the boyar heard this he commanded: "Eh, little fellow, throw him into the water." 
 The cock was caught and thrown into the well. He began to say: "Little beak, little beak, drink the water! Little mouth, little mouth, drink the water!" And he drank all the water. Having drunk it he flew to the boyar's house, perched on the balcony, and crowed again: "Cock-a-doodle-doo! Boyar, boyar, give us back our sky blue golden hand mill! Boyar, boyar, give us back our sky blue golden hand mill!" 
 The boyar ordered the cook to throw him into a hot stove. The cock was caught and thrown into a hot stove, straight into the fire. And he began to say: "Little beak, little beak, pour water! Little mouth, little mouth, pour water!" and he 
 
 quenched all the fire in the stove. Then he took wing, flew into the boyar's room, and crowed again: "Cock-a-doodle-doo! Boyar, boyar, give us back our sky blue golden hand mill! Boyar, boyar, give us back our sky blue golden hand mill!" The guests heard him and ran away from the house; the master ran after them to bring them back; Little Cock Golden Crest snatched the hand mill and flew with it to the old man and woman. 
 
