
 IN A certain town there lived two merchants at the very edge of the river. One was Russian, the other Tartar; both were extremely wealthy. Now it came to pass that the Russian merchant went bankrupt as a result of some unfortunate dealings, and nothing was left of his wealth: all his possessions were seized. He was now in bad straits, andVas poor as a churchmouse. He went to his friend the Tartar and asked him to lend him some money. The Tartar said: "Who will be your guarantor?" "Whom shall I name? I have no one left. But wait a minute-let the life-giving cross on the church be your security." "Very well, my friend," said the Tartar, "I will trust your cross; what you believe in is good enough for me." And he gave the Russian merchant fifty thousand rubles. The Russian took the money, said farewell to the Tartar, and again set out to trade in foreign lands. 
 At the end of two years he had earned one hundred and fifty thousand rubles with the original fifty thousand. He happened to be sailing with his goods on the Danube, from one town to another; suddenly a storm came up and the ship seemed about to founder. The merchant then recalled that he had borrowed money against the security of the life-giving cross, and had not paid his debt; he decided that this was the reason for the storm. He had no sooner come to this conclusion than the storm began to subside. The merchant took a barrel, counted out fifty thousand rubles, wrote a note to the Tartar, put it in the barrel with the money, and threw the barrel into the water, thinking, "Since I gave the cross as security, the cross will deliver the money to its rightful owner." 
 The barrel sank to the bottom at once, and everyone thought that the money would be lost. But instead, what happened? The Tartar had a Russian cook. One day she went to fetch water at the river. She saw a barrel floating; she waded into the 
 
 river and tried to grasp it, but every time she came close to it, it moved away; when she waded from the barrel to the bank, it followed her. She struggled with it for some time, then went home and told her master about it. At first he did not believe her, but then decided to go to the river and see this barrel for himself. He came, and saw that the barrel was really floating near the bank. He undressed, went into the water, and no sooner had he begun to wade than the barrel drifted to him by itself; the Tartar took it home, opened it, and found the money and the note. He read the note, which ran thus: "My dear friend, I am returning to you the fifty thousand rubles that I borrowed from you against the security of the life-giving cross." The Tartar read the note and was amazed at the power of the life-giving cross. He counted the money: the whole sum was there. Meanwhile the Russian merchant, having traded for about five years, had earned a handsome little fortune. He returned to his own town, and thinking that his barrel had been lost, decided that his first duty was to settle his debt to the Tartar; so he came to him and offered him the money. Then the Tartar told the merchant everything that had happened, and how he had found the barrel with the money and the note in the river. He showed the Russian the note and asked: "Is this really in your hand?" The Russian merchant answered: "It is." Everyone was amazed at the miracle, and the Tartar said: "So you see, brother, you don't owe me any money; take it back." The Russian merchant offered a thanksgiving service to God. The next day the Tartar had himself and his family baptized. The Russian merchant was his godfather, and the cook his godmother. After that both merchants lived long and happily; they reached a ripe old age and died in peace. 
 
 
 
 
