
 IN the city of Kiev our Prince Vladimir had many servants and peasants in his household, and he also had a nobleman called Danilo the Luckless. When Sunday came, Prince Vladimir treated everyone to a glass of liquor, but Danilo received only a kick in the backside. On the great holidays, everyone received a gift, but he received nothing at all. On Easter 
 
 Eve, just before Easter Day, Prince Vladimir summoned Danilo the Luckless before him, gave him forty times forty sables, and commanded that he fashion for his master a fur coat for the holiday; the sables were not skinned, the buttons were not molded, the loops were not braided; and the prince ordered him to mold the shapes of forest beasts in the buttons, and to embroider the shapes of birds of foreign lands in the loops. 
 Danilo the Luckless grew discouraged with his task, threw it down, and went to walk beyond the city gates; he walked aimlessly along the road, weeping bitter tears. An old woman stopped him and said: "Hey, Danilo, don't be so silly! Why are you weeping, you luckless wretch?" "Ah, you old hag, all stitched and patched, and eaten by fever, let me alone, I have troubles of my own!" He walked on a little farther, then thought to himself: "Why did I abuse her so?" He went back to her and said: "Little grandmother, little dove, forgive me! This is why I am distressed: Prince Vladimir has given me forty times forty sables and wants a fur coat made of them by tomorrow, with many molded buttons and braided silken loops- there must be golden lions on the buttons, and birds from foreign lands singing sweet songs must be embroidered on the loops. And how can I do all that? I would rather stand in the tavern with a cup of vodka in my hands." 
 The old woman replied: "Ah, now I am the grandmother, the little dove! Well, go to the blue sea, stand by the old oak. At midnight the blue sea will surge up, and Chudo Yudo, the sea monster without hands, without feet, and with a gray beard, will come to you. Seize him by his beard and thrash him until he asks you: 'Why are you thrashing me, Danilo the Luckless?' And you answer: 'I want the lovely Swan Maiden to stand before me, and through her feathers let her body be seen, and through her body let her bones be seen, and through her bones let it be seen how from bone to bone the marrow flows, like pearls poured from one vessel to another.' " Danilo the Luckless came to the blue sea, stood by the old oak, and at midnight the sea surged up, and Chudo Yudo, the sea monster without hands, without feet, with nothing but a gray beard, came up to 
 
 
 
 him. Danilo seized him hy his heard and began to beat him against the damp earth. Chudo Yudo asked him: "Why do you thrash me, Danilo the Luckless?" "This is why: I want the lovely Swan Maiden to stand before me. And through her feathers let her body be seen, and through her body let her bones be seen, and through her bones let it be seen how from bone to bone the marrow flows, like pearls poured from one vessel to another." 
 After a little while the lovely Swan Maiden came sailing to the shore and said these words: "Danilo the Luckless, are you shirking a great deed or trying to perform one?" "Ah, lovely Swan Maiden! If I am shirking a great deed, then double is my need! Prince Vladimir has ordered me to make him a fur coat for tomorrow; but the sables are not skinned, the buttons are not molded, the loops are not braided!" "Will you take me as your wife? Then everything will be done." He thought to himself: "How can I marry her?" "Well, Danilo, why are you hesitating?" "I will take you!" She shook her wings, nodded her head, and there came forth twelve strong men-masons, carpenters, and bricklayers. In a trice a house was ready. Danilo took her by her right hand, kissed her sweet lips, and led her into the princely chambers; they sat at table, ate, drank, and refreshed themselves, and plighted their troth. "Now, Danilo, lie down and rest. Do not worry, everything will be done." 
 She put him to bed and went out on the crystal porch. There she shook her wings and nodded her head, saying: "My own father, give me my craftsmen." Twelve youths appeared and asked her: "Lovely Swan Maiden, what do you command us to do?" "Sew me a fur coat. The sables are not skinned, the buttons are not molded, the loops are not braided." They set to work: some prepared the skins and sewed the fur coat, some smelted and molded the buttons, some braided the loops, and in a trice a marvelous fur coat was ready. The lovely Swan Maiden roused Danilo the Luckless: "Awake, my beloved! The fur coat is ready and the church bells are ringing in Prince Vladimir's city of Kiev; it is time for you to rise and attend matins." 
 Danilo rose, donned the fur coat, and went forth. The Swan 
 
 Maiden looked through the window; she stopped him, gave him a silver cane, and told him: "When you leave the church, strike your chest with this cane; the birds will sing merrily and the lions will roar terribly. Take the fur coat off your shoulders and give it forthwith to Prince Vladimir, that he may not forget us. He will invite you to his table and give you a cup of wine; do not drink it to the bottom, for if you do, evil will befall you. And do not boast of me, do not boast that in one night we built a house." Danilo took the cane and set out. The Swan Maiden called him back again, and gave him three eggs, two silver eggs and one golden egg, and said: "Offer the silver ones to the prince and his wife, and the golden one to her with whom you will live all your life." 
 Danilo the Luckless said farewell to her and went to attend matins. All the people were amazed: "Here is Danilo the Luckless, and he has finished the fur coat for the holiday!" After matins he approached the prince and his wife, congratulated them as is the custom at Easter, and by accident took out the golden egg. Aliosha Popovich, the rake, saw it. The people began to leave the church. Then Danilo the Luckless struck his chest with the silver cane, and the birds began to sing and the lions to roar. All were amazed and looked at Danilo, but Aliosha Popovich disguised himself as a crippled beggar and begged for holy alms. Everyone gave him something, only Danilo the Luckless stood there wondering: "What shall I give him? I have nothing!" And because it was such a great holiday he gave him the golden egg. Aliosha Popovich took the golden egg and donned his usual clothes. 
 Prince Vladimir invited everyone to his house, and they ate and drank and refreshed themselves and boasted of their exploits. Danilo got drunk and in his drunkenness boasted of his wife. Aliosha Popovich, the rake, began to boast that he knew Danilo's wife. Danilo said: "If you know my wife, let my head be cut off; if you do not, yours shall be cut off!" 
 Aliosha went he knew not whither; he walked and wept. An old woman stopped him and said: "Why are you crying, Aliosha Popovich?" "Go away, old hag, I have my own troubles." "Very well, but I might have been useful to you." He began 
 
 to question her: "My dear grandmother, what did you want to tell me?" "Aha, now I am the dear grandmother!" Then he told her: "I boasted that I knew Danilo's wife." "Ah, little father, how could you know her? Not even a little bird has flown where she is. Go to such and such a house, invite her to dine with the prince. She will begin to wash and make ready and will put a little chain on the window. Take this chain and show it to Danilo the Luckless." 
 Aliosha came to the high-arched window and summoned the lovely Swan Maiden to dine with the prince. She began to wash, to dress and make ready for the feast. Meanwhile Aliosha took away the chain, ran to the palace, and showed it to Danilo the Luckless. "Well, Prince Vladimir," said Danilo the Luckless, "I see that my head must be cut off. Permit me to go home and say farewell to my wife." 
 He went home and said: "Ah, lovely Swan Maiden, what have I done? I boasted of you in my drunkenness and have forfeited my life." "I know everything, Danilo the Luckless. Go and invite to your house the prince and his wife, and all the citizens. And if the prince excuses himself because of the dust and the mud, if he says that the roads are not good, that the blue sea has surged up and swamps have appeared, say to him: 'Fear not, Prince Vladimir! Across the swamps, across the rivers, there are white hazelwood bridges with oaken planks, and on the bridges are spread purple cloths, and everything is nailed with copper nails. The brave knights' boots will not be covered with dust, the hoofs of their horses will not sink into the mud.' " Danilo the Luckless went to invite his guests, and the lovely Swan Maiden went out on the porch, shook her wings, nodded her head, and made a bridge from her house to the palace of Prince Vladimir. The bridge was all spread with purple cloth and nailed with copper nails; on one side of it flowers bloomed and nightingales sang; on the other side apples ripened and other fruit trees blossomed. 
 The prince and the princess set out on their way with all the brave warriors. They came to the first river and fine beer flowed in it; near that beer many soldiers fell. They came to the second river and fine mead flowed in it; more than half 
 
 of the brave troops bowed to that mead and lay down. They came to the third river and fine wine flowed in it; here the officers fell to and drank themselves into a stupor. They came to the fourth river and strong vodka flowed in it; the prince looked back and saw all his generals lying dead drunk on the bank The prince remained with only three companions-his wife, Aliosha Popovich the rake, and Danilo the Luckless. The guests arrived, entered the high chambers, and there found tables of maplewood, with silken tablecloths and painted chairs. They sat at table and there were many meats of every description, and of foreign wines not bottles, not barrels, but whole rivers flowed. Prince Vladimir and the princess did not eat nor drink but waited only to see the lovely Swan Maiden. 
 They sat at table for a long time, they waited for her a long time; finally, the moment came to return home. Danilo the Luckless called her once, twice, and thrice-but no, she did not come out to her guests. Aliosha Popovich the rake said: "If my wife did this, I would teach her to obey her husband." The lovely Swan Maiden heard this, came out on the porch, and said these words: "This is how I teach husbands!" And she shook her wings, nodded her head, soared up, and flew away. And the guests remained sitting in the mud: on one side there was the sea, on the other the mountains, on the third were forests, and on the fourth were swamps. Put your pride away, prince-try to ride home on Danilo! 
 Before they got home to their palace they were smeared with mud from top to toe. Then I wanted to see the prince and princess, but they kicked me out of the yard. I jumped under the gate, and my whole back ached. 
 
 
