
 A HEN AND A cock were walking in the priest's barnyard. Suddenly the cock began to choke on a bean. The hen was sorry for him, so she went to the river to ask for some water. The river answered: "Go to the lime tree and ask for a leaf; then I will give you some water." 
 The hen went to the lime tree. "Lime tree, lime tree, give me a leaf; I will take it to the river and the river will give me water; I will take the water to the cock, who is choking on a bean-he cannot breathe and he cannot sneeze, he is lying like one dead!" The lime tree answered: "Go to the dairymaid and ask for some thread; then I will give you a leaf." 
 The hen went to the dairymaid. "Dairymaid, dairymaid, give me some thread; I will take it to the lime tree, and it will give me a leaf; I will take the leaf to the river, and the river 
 
 will give me water; I will take the water to the cock, who is choking on a bean-he cannot breathe and he cannot sneeze, he is lying like one dead!" The dairymaid answered: "Go to the cow and ask for some milk; then I will give you the thread." 
 The hen went to the cow: "Cow, cow, give me some milk; I will take it to the dairymaid, who will give me some thread; I will take the thread to the lime tree, and it will give me a leaf; I will take the leaf to the river, and the river will give me water; I will take the water to the cock, who is choking on a bean-he cannot breathe and he cannot sneeze, he is lying like one dead!" The cow answered: "Go to the mowers and ask them for some hay; then I will give you the milk." 
 The hen went to the mowers: "Mowers, mowers, give me some hay; I will take it to the cow, who will give me some milk; I will take the milk to the dairymaid, who will give me some thread; I will take the thread to the lime tree, and it will give me a leaf; I will take the leaf to the river, and the river will give me water; I will take the water to the cock, who is choking on a bean-he cannot breathe and he cannot sneeze, he is lying like one dead!" The mowers answered: "Go to the smiths, bid them forge a scythe. Then we will give you the hay." 
 The hen went to the smiths: "Smiths, smiths, forge me a scythe; I will take it to the mowers, who will give me some hay; I will take the hay to the cow, who will give me some milk; I will take the milk to the dairymaid, who will give me some thread; I will take the thread to the lime tree, and it will give me a leaf; I will take the leaf to the river, and the river will give me water; I will take the water to the cock, who is choking on a bean-he cannot breathe and he cannot sneeze, he is lying like one dead!" The smiths answered: "Go to the Laians* and ask them for some coal. Then we will forge you a scythe." 
 The hen went to the Laians: "Laians, Laians, give me some coal; I will take it to the smiths, who will forge me a scythe; I 
 * Inhabitants of the village of Laia-near the river Laia, a confluent of the northern Dvina-who extracted coal for the smithies in the port of Archangel. 
 
 will take the scythe to the mowers, who will give me some hay; I will take the hay to the cow, who will give me some milk; I will take the milk to the dairymaid, who will give me some thread; I will take the thread to the lime tree, and it will give me a leaf; I will take the leaf to the river and the river will give me water; I will take the water to the cock who is choking on a bean-he cannot breathe and he cannot sneeze, he is lying like one dead!" 
 The Laians gave her some coal. The hen took the coal to the smiths and the smiths forged her a scythe. She took the scythe to the mowers and the mowers mowed some hay for her. She took the hay to the cow and the cow gave her some milk. She took the milk to the dairymaid and the dairymaid gave her some thread. She took the thread to the lime tree and the lime tree gave her a leaf. She took the leaf to the river and the river gave her some water. She took the water to the cock. But he was lying there quite still, neither panting nor breathing. He had choked to death on a bean! 
