
 Once upon A time there lived an old woman who had a one-eyed son named Foma Berennikov. One day he went to plow his field with his wretched horse. He was suddenly overcome by misery and sat down on a mound of earth, to ease himself; the flies buzzed and buzzed around the dung. He seized a twig, beat the swarm of flies, and began to count how many he had killed. He counted five hundred of them and many of them were still uncounted. Foma decided that they were numberless. He came to his horse and found twelve gadflies sitting on it; he slew them all. Then he returned to his mother and asked her for her solemn blessing: "I have slain countless small fry," he said, "and twelve mighty heroes. Let me go forth, mother, to do great deeds, for plowing the land is not a hero's business but a peasant's." His mother gave him her blessing, praying that he might do great deeds and carry out heroic exploits. He hung his best basket at his girdle, took his blunt scythe off his shoulders, and placed it in the 
 
 He traveled along the road in unfamiliar country till he came to a post, and he wrote with chalk on this post-for although he had neither gold nor silver in his pocket, he did happen to have some chalk. He wrote: "Champion Foma Berennikov, who slew twelve mighty heroes at one blow and an unnumbered army in addition, passed this way." Having written this, he went on. Ilya Muromets traveled along the same road, came to the post, beheld the inscription, and said: "Here is the champion's mark; he does not spend gold nor silver, only chalk." And he wrote in silver: "Following Foma Berennikov, Champion Ilya Muromets passed this way." He overtook Foma Berennikov and said (apparently the chalk inscription had impressed him): "Mighty Foma Berennikov, where shall I ride-in front of you or behind you?" "Bide behind me," answered Foma. 
 Young Aliosha Popovich traveled the same road; he came to the same post and from afar saw an inscription blazing like fire on the post. He read the inscriptions of Foma Berennikov and Ilya Muromets, drew pure gold from his pocket, and wrote: "Following Ilya Muromets, Aliosha Popovich passed this way." He overtook Ilya Muromets and said: "Tell me, Ilya Muromets, shall I ride in front of you or behind you?" "Ask not me but my elder brother, Foma Berennikov." Young Aliosha Popovich rode up to Foma Berennikov. "Brave Foma Berennikov, where shall Aliosha Popovich ride?" "Ride behind us." 
 They traveled along the road in unfamiliar country till they came to green gardens. Ilya Muromets and Aliosha Popovich pitched their white tents and Foma Berennikov spread his pair of drawers. These gardens belonged to the Prussian king, and the Chinese king, aided by six mighty champions, was at that time waging war on the Prussian king. And the Prussian king sent a letter to Foma Berennikov, saying: "The Chinese king is waging war against me, the Prussian king; will you aid me?" Foma was not strong in the art of reading; he gazed at the letter, shook his head, and said: "Very well." 
 The Chinese king approached the city. Ilya Muromets and young Aliosha Popovich came to Foma Berennikov and spoke these words: "They are attacking the king, approaching his 
 
 city; we must defend him. Will you go yourself or send us?" "You shall go, Ilyushka Muromets!" Ilya Muromets slew all the attackers. Then the Chinese king sent forth his six champions and another unnumbered host of troops. Ilya Muromets and Aliosha Popovich came to Foma Berennikov saying: "Tell us, Foma Berennikov, will you go yourself or will you send us?" "You shall go, Aliosha Popovich, my young brother!" Young Aliosha Popovich rode forth and slew the host of troops and the six mighty champions. The Chinese king said: "I have still another champion, whom I have up till now kept for breeding purposes; now I will let him fight too." 
 So he brought an unnumbered host of troops and with them his secret mighty champion, and the king said to him: "The Russian champion beats us not by force but by cunning; now do everything that the Russian champion does." Ilya Muromets and young Aliosha Popovich came to Foma Berennikov asking: "Will you go yourself or will you send us?" "I shall go myself. Bring me my horse!" The champions' horses were grazing in the open field and Foma's stood near by, eating oats. Ilya Muromets came to Foma's horse and it began to rear and snap! Ilya Muromets grew angry, took Foma's horse by the tail, and flung him across the hedge. Young Aliosha Popovich said to him: "Did not Foma Berennikov see us? He will punish us for this!" "Apparently his strength is not in his horse but in himself," said Ilya Muromets and brought the wretched nag to Foma Berennikov. 
 Foma bestrode the horse and thought to himself: "Let them kill me! It won't be all at once." He rode forward, bending down to the horse's mane and blinking his eyes. The Chinese champion, remembering the king's instructions, also bent down to his horse's mane and blinked. Foma got off his horse, sat on a stone, and began to sharpen his scythe; the Chinese champion too got off his mighty horse and began to sharpen his sword. He saw that Foma Berennikov was one-eyed and thought: "He has closed one eye; I will be even trickier and close both eyes." 
 He had no sooner closed his eyes, than Foma Berennikov cut off his head. Foma took the champion's mighty steed, tried to 
 
 mount it, but could not. So Foma tied the mighty steed to a hundred-year-old oak, climbed up the tree, and leaped upon the steed. As soon as the steed felt a rider on his back he rushed forward, tearing out the oak with its roots; he galloped with all his mighty strength, dragging the enormous oak after him. Foma Berennikov cried: "Help, help!" But the stupid Chinamen did not know the Russian language and from fear took to their heels. The mighty horse trampled them under his hoofs and smote them with the hundred-year-old oak; he slew them all to the last man. 
 Now the Chinese king wrote a letter to Foma Berennikov, saying: "Never again shall I wage war against you." That promise was just what Foma wanted. Ilya Muromets and young Aliosha Popovich marveled at Foma Berennikov. 
 Now Foma went to the Prussian king. "What shall I reward you with?" asked the king. "Take as much gold from my treasure as you will, or half of my glorious kingdom, or my beautiful daughter." "Give me the beautiful daughter," Foma replied, "and invite to the wedding my younger brothers, Ilya Muromets and young Aliosha Popovich." And Foma Berennikov married the beautiful princess. 
 Thus not only mighty men have luck! He who shouts loudest about himself fares best. 
 
 
 
