
 LISTEN TO THIS amazing story. A fox was coming from distant deserts and saw a cock perched on a tall tree. She spoke to him kindly: "0 chanticleer, my beloved child! You are sitting on a tall tree and thinking thoughts that are evil and accursed. You cocks keep many wives: some of you have as many as ten of them, some twenty, some thirty, with time their number reaches even forty! Whenever you chance to meet, you fight over your wives and concubines. Come down to the ground, my beloved child, and do penance. I myself have been in distant deserts, I have not eaten nor drunk and have suffered many hardships; and all the time I longed to hear your confession, my beloved child." "0 holy mother fox, I have not fasted and I have not prayed; come some other time." "0 my beloved child, you have not fasted and you have not prayed, but come down to the ground none the less. Repent, else you will die in sin." "0 holy mother fox, 
 
 your mouth is as honey, your words are kind, your tongue is sweet! 'Judge not, that ye be not judged'; what we have sown, that we shall reap. You want to bring me to repentance by force-not to save me, but to devour my body." "O chanticleer, my beloved child, why do you say such words? Have you read the parable of the publican and the Pharisee, in which the publican is saved, and the Pharisee perishes because of his pride? My beloved child, unless you repent you shall perish on your tall tree. Come down lower, then you will be closer to repentance; you will be pardoned and absolved and admitted to the kingdom of heaven." 
 The cock recognized the mortal sin in his soul; he was moved to tears and began to descend from branch to branch, from twig to twig and from stem to stem; he came down to the ground and sat in front of the fox. The fox, cunning beast that she was, jumped, gripped the cock in her sharp claws, glared at him with ferocious eyes, and gritted her sharp teeth, ready to devour him alive, the impious bird. 
 Quoth chanticleer to the fox: "0 holy mother fox, your mouth is as honey, your words are kind, your tongue is sweet! But will you save me if you devour my body?" "I do not want your body nor your colored garment. I want to pay you back an old favor. Do you remember? Once as I was going to a peasant's house to eat a little chick, you, idle fool that you are, perched on a high roost, and wailed and shouted in an enormous voice. You began to stamp your feet and flap your wings; then the hens began to gabble, the geese began to cackle, the dogs began to bark, the stallions to neigh, and the cows to moo. Everyone on the place was aroused; the women came running with broomsticks and the men with axes. They wanted to kill me, all on account of that little chick-and yet an owl has been staying with them from generation to generation and always eats their chicks. No, you idle fool, you shall not escape alive!" 
 Quoth the cock: "O holy mother fox, your mouth is as honey, your words are kind, your tongue is sweet! Yesterday I was asked by the Trunchinsk metropolitan to be a deacon; I was praised before the whole choir and congregation as a handsome 
 
 youth, respectable, eager for learning, and with a beautiful voice! Could I not persuade you by my entreaty, mother fox, to become at least my wafer woman? We shall profit greatly; we shall be given sweet cakes, great roasts, butter, eggs and cheeses." 
 The fox was moved by the cock's plea, and her hold on him weakened. The cock tore himself loose, flew up to the tall tree, and wailed and shouted in an enormous voice: "My dear Mrs. Wafer Baker, welcome! Is not the profit great, are not the wafers sweet? Have you not rubbed off your hump carrying the roasts? Wouldn't you gladly get to the nuts, little rascal? But have you enough teeth?" 
 The fox went into the woods, with a very long face, and lamented bitterly: "I have been all over the world, and nowhere have I seen anything so disgraceful. Since when are cocks deacons, and foxes wafer bakers?" So glory and power to the Lord for all time to come, and this is the end of our tale. 
 THE BEAR 
 Once there lived an old man and his old wife and they had no children. The old woman said to her husband: "Old man, go get some wood." He went and met a bear, who said: "Old man, let us fight." The old man took his ax and cut off one of the bear's paws. He returned home and said to his wife: "Old woman, cook the bear's paw." She removed the skin, placed it under her, and began to pluck out the fur while the paw was cooking on the stove. The bear roared and roared, then thought the matter over, and made himself a paw of lime tree wood. He hobbled on his wooden paw to the old man's house and sang: 
 
 Creak, my paw, Creak, limewood! The water sleeps, And the earth sleeps, The townsmen sleep, The villagers sleep; Only one woman is awake, Sitting on my skin, Spinning my fur, Cooking my flesh! 
 The old man and his wife were terrified. He hid on the shelf and covered himself with a trough, and she hid on the stove and covered herself with some black shirts. The bear entered the room. From fear the old man groaned under the trough, and the old woman coughed under the black shirts. The bear found them and ate them. 
