 ONCE there lived an old man and an old woman who had a daughter. One day the young girl was eating beans and dropped one bean on the ground. It grew and grew till it reached the sky. The old man climbed up the beanstalk to the sky, walked all around, and feasted his eyes upon the scene. He said to himself: "I will bring the old woman up here, she will be delighted." He climbed down to the ground, put the old woman in a bag, took the bag between his teeth, and climbed up again; he climbed and climbed, got tired, and dropped the bag. He hastened down, opened the bag, and saw the old woman lying there with bared teeth and staring eyes. He said: "Why do you grin, old woman? Why do you show your teeth?" But when he saw that she was dead, he burst into tears. They had lived all alone in the midst of a wilderness, so there was no one to be the old woman's mourner. The old man took a bag with several pairs of white chickens and went in search of a mourner. He saw a bear go by, and said: "Bear, mourn for my wife; I will give you two white chickens." The bear roared: "Ah, my dear grandmother, how I mourn for you." "No," said the old man, "you don't know how to lament." And he went on farther. He walked and walked and met a wolf; he had the wolf lament, but the wolf did not do it well either. 
 
 He walked on again, met a fox, and made her lament in return for a pair of white chickens. She began to mourn: "Turu, turu, grandmother-grandfather killed you." The peasant found her song to his liking and made her sing it a second, a third, and a fourth time-then he discovered that he did not have a fourth pair of chickens. The old man said: "Fox, fox, I left the fourth pair at home; come to my house." 
 The fox followed him. They came to his house; the old man took a bag, put a pair of dogs in it, covered them with the fox's six chickens, and gave the bag to her. The fox took it and ran; after a while she stopped near a tree stump and said: "I will sit on the stump and eat a white chicken." She ate it and ran on; then she sat down on another stump and ate the second chicken, then the third, the fourth, the fifth, and the sixth. When she opened the bag for the seventh time, the dogs jumped out at her. The fox took to her heels, ran and ran, hid under a log, and asked: "Little ears, little ears of mine, what did you do?" "We listened and listened, lest the dogs eat the fox." "Little eyes, little eyes of mine, what did you do?" "We looked and we looked, lest the dogs eat the fox." "Little feet, little feet, what did you do?" "We ran and ran, lest the dogs eat the fox." "And you, tail, what did you do?" "I got entangled whenever we had to cross stumps, bushes, or logs, so that the dogs might catch the fox and tear her to pieces." "Ah, you wicked organ! If that is so, here, dogs! Eat my tail!" And she stuck out her tail. The dogs grabbed it, then pulled out the fox herself and tore her to pieces. 
