Would you like to hear the tale of the weak little goat shedding on one side? Then listen, listen! There was once a peasant who had a little hare. The peasant went to the field and there he saw a goat lying on the grass; one side of her had lost its hair, and the other not. The peasant pitied her, took her home, and put her in the shed. Having supped and rested a little, he went to his kitchen garden, 
 
 and the hare went after him. Then the goat came from the shed to the house and bolted the door with a hook. 
 The bare wanted to eat and ran to the door of the house; he pushed with his paw, but the door was locked. "Who is there?" asked the little hare. The goat answered: "I, the weak little goat, shedding on one side. If I come out I'll break all your ribs!" The little hare was grieved, he went out into the road and wept. He met a wolf, who asked him: "Why are you weeping?" "There is someone in our house," the hare said through his tears. "Come with me," said the wolf. "I will drive him out." They came to the door. "Who is there?" asked the wolf. The goat stamped her feet and said: "I, the weak little goat, shedding on one side. If I come out I'll break all your ribs!" They went away from the door. The little hare again began to weep, and went out into the road, and the wolf ran away to the woods. 
 Then the hare met a cock, who said: "Why are you weeping?" The hare told him, and the cock said: "Come with me, I will drive her out." Near the door, the hare, to frighten the goat, said: "A cock has come with me; he carries a saber on his shoulder, he is coming to kill the goat and cut her head off." They came to the door and the cock asked: "Who is there?" The goat answered as before: "I, the weak little goat, shedding on one side. If I come out I'll break all your ribs!" 
 Again the hare went into the street, weeping. A busy bee flew to him and said: "Who has hurt you? Why are you crying?" The hare told her and the bee flew to the house. She asked: "Who is there?" and the goat answered as before. The bee grew angry and began to fly around the walls. She buzzed and buzzed till she found a little hole; she crawled through it, stung the goat on her shedding side, and made a swelling there. The goat rushed out of the door as fast as she could and never came back. The little hare ran into the house, ate and drank, and lay down to sleep. When he awakens, the real tale will begin. 
 

