
 ONCE there was a wealthy merchant who died leaving a son called Ivan the Luckless. Ivan squandered all his wealth on drink and revelry and then went to look for work. He walked in the market and a very handsome fellow he was. At that time a lovely maiden, the daughter of a merchant, was sitting in her window embroidering a carpet with various silks. When she saw the merchant's son she fell in love with him. "Let me marry him," she said to her mother. At first the old woman would not hear of it but later she talked matters over with her husband. "Perhaps his luck will be improved by 
 
 his wife's," she said. "For our daughter was born with a veil over her face and a silver spoon in her mouth." So they assented to their daughter's wish and gave her to Ivan in marriage. She bought cotton, embroidered a carpet, and sent her husband to sell it. "Sell this carpet for a hundred rubles," she said. "But if you meet a virtuous man, give it to him in exchange for a piece of good advice." 
 Ivan met an old man, who began to bargain for the carpet. He agreed to buy it for a hundred rubles, took out the money, and said: "Which do you prefer-money or a piece of good advice?" The merchant's son thought and thought: he had not forgotten what his wife had told him. "Give me your advice," he said. "Do not fear anything before death," said the old man. Then he took the carpet and left. The merchant's son went home and told his wife all that had happened; she thanked him, bought silk, embroidered another carpet, and again sent her husband to sell it. "Sell it for five hundred rubles," she said, "but if you meet a good man, give it to him in exchange for a piece of good advice." The merchant's son went to the market; he met the same old man, who agreed to buy the carpet for five hundred rubles and as he took out the money said: "But if you prefer, I will give you a piece of good advice." "Here is the carpet; give me your good advice." "Keep cool, use your judgment, don't cut off a head," said the old man. Then he took the carpet and left. The merchant's son returned home and told his wife all that had happened, but she did not say a word. 
 One day the merchant's son's uncles made ready to sail across the sea and trade in foreign lands; the merchant's son somehow managed to rig up a ship, said farewell to his wife, and went with them. They sailed upon the ocean; suddenly a sea monster came out of the water. "Give us a Russian man to judge a dispute," said the monster to the merchants. "I will bring him back." The uncles thought and thought, then came to their nephew and asked him to go into the sea. He recalled the old man's advice-"Do not fear anything before death"- and went into the sea with the monster. There he found the Sea Fate trying to solve the question of which is the most pre- 
 
 cious-gold, silver, or copper. "If you settle this problem," said the Sea Fate, "I will reward you." "Certainly copper is more valuable than the other metals," said the merchant's son. "For without copper one cannot settle an account; with copper one has kopeks and pennies, with copper one can also make a ruble; you cannot bite that off gold or silver." "You are right," said the Sea Fate. "Go back to your ship." The monster took him back to his ship and he found it loaded to the brim with precious stones. 
 The uncles had sailed far ahead, but the merchant's son caught up with them and began to quarrel with them as to whose merchandise was better. They said to him: "Nephew, you have only one ship, we have a hundred." They quarreled and quarreled, then the uncles grew angry and went to complain about him to the king. At first the king wanted to have the merchant's son hanged without trial for contradicting his uncles, but later he asked that the merchandise be brought to him for inspection. The uncles brought gold and silken fabrics, and the king was lost in contemplation of them. "Now let me see your merchandise," he finally said to the merchant's son. "Sire, order your windows to be closed; I want to show you my merchandise in the dark." The king ordered the windows to be closed; the merchant's son drew a precious stone from his pocket and it illumined everything. "Your merchandise is better, merchant's son. For that, take all your uncles' ships!" 
 He took his uncles' ships, traded for exactly twenty years, acquired much goods of every kind, and returned home with enormous, countless riches. He entered his house and beheld his wife lying in bed with two young fellows. His heart boiled with rage and he drew out his sharp saber: "Now I will slay my wife's friends," he thought. But then he recalled the old man's good advice: "Keep cool, use your judgment, don't cut off a head." He roused his wife and she jumped up and began to nudge the young fellows, saying: "My children, your father has come back!" Then the merchant's son learned that in his absence his wife had borne him twins. 

