
 ONCE there was a laborer to whom God had given great strength. He learned that a dragon was haunting the king's daughter, and he boasted that he alone could destroy this terrible beast. The king's men heard his boasts and they pressed him: "Go, laborer, heal the princess!" If the ale is drawn it must be drunk; so the laborer went to the king and said: "I can heal the princess; what will I receive for my trouble?" The king was overjoyed and said: "I will give you the princess in marriage." The laborer asked for seven oxhides, iron nuts, iron claws, and an iron hammer. He donned the seven oxhides and the iron claws, filled his pocket with nuts, real ones and iron ones, took the big hammer in his hands, and went to the princess' room. 
 The dragon flew to the princess. Upon seeing the laborer he gnashed his teeth and said: "Why have you come here?" "For the same purpose as you," said the laborer, and remained sitting where he was, cracking nuts. The dragon saw that he could accomplish nothing by force, so he came over to the laborer and asked for some nuts; the laborer gave him the iron ones. The dragon tried to crack them with his teeth and then spat them out: "Brother, your nuts are no good. Let us play a game of cards instead." "With pleasure, but for what stakes?" They agreed that he who lost would get a thrashing. They began to play and the dragon lost. The laborer took his hammer and gave the dragon such a thrashing that he was almost stunned. "Now," said the dragon, "let us play for our skins; whoever loses will have his skin torn off." The laborer lost; the dragon tore one oxhide off him. "Let us play another game," the dragon said. This time the dragon lost; the laborer immediately plunged his iron claws into the dragon's skin and tore it off. The dragon died on the spot. 
 When the king heard of this he was overjoyed and married his daughter to the laborer. But the princess grew tired of living with a simple peasant; she ordered him to be taken to the woods and slain there. Her servants seized him, led him to the 
 
 woods, but pitied him and did not kill him. The laborer wandered through the woods weeping. He met three men who were engaged in a dispute. The moment they came up to him they began to implore him: "Please, good man, settle our dispute. We have found a pair of boots that walk, a flying carpet, and a magic tablecloth. How shall we divide them?" "This way: whoever climbs up that oak first shall have them all." They foolishly consented and rushed to the tree. As soon as they had climbed up the laborer donned the walking boots, sat on the flying carpet, took the magic tablecloth, and said: "I want to be near the king's city." 
 And in a trice he was there. He pitched a tent, ordered his tablecloth to spread a dinner, and invited the king and his daughter to visit him. They came to him but they did not recognize him. He feasted them, gave them meat and drink, then led the princess to the flying carpet, quietly took the tablecloth, pushed the princess onto the carpet, and ordered it to fly into a dark forest. In the forest the laborer told the princess who he was; she began to caress and cajole him, and succeeded in beguiling him. As soon as he fell asleep, the princess seized the magic tablecloth, sat on the flying carpet, and was gone. 
 The laborer awoke and saw that the princess, the flying carpet, and the magic tablecloth were gone; only his walking boots remained. He wandered and wandered through the woods; he felt hungry, spied two apple trees, plucked an apple from one of them, and began to eat it. He ate one apple and a horn grew on his head; he ate another apple and another horn grew on his head. He tried the apples of the other tree; at once his horns vanished and he turned into a handsome youth. He filled his pocket with apples from both trees and went to the king's city. He walked by the palace and saw a scullery maid, one of the princess' servants, who was very ugly. "Don't you want an apple, little dove?" She took one and ate it, and turned into such a beauty as no tongue can tell of nor pen describe. The scullery maid went to the princess and the princess gasped. "Buy some for me," she said, "buy them without fail!" The maid went out and bought some; but when the princess ate of them, horns grew on her head. 
 
 Next day the laborer came to the princess and told her that he could turn her back into a beauty. She implored him to do so. He told her to go into the bath chamber; there he undressed her and belabored her so severely with iron rods that he was sure that she would remember it for a long time. Then he told her that he was her lawful husband. The princess repented, gave him back his flying carpet and his magic tablecloth, and the laborer gave her some of the good apples to eat. And they began to live happily and to prosper. 

