
 There WERE ONCE three brothers; two were clever, and the third was a simpleton. One day they went to a wood and wanted to eat their dinner there. They filled a pot with gruel and cold water (the simpleton had told them to do this), but did not know where to get fire. Not far from them there was a beekeeper's house. The eldest brother said: "I will go to the beekeeper's house to get some fire." He went and said to the old man there: "Grandfather, give me a light." The old man said: "First sing me a song." "But I don't know any song, grandfather." "Then dance for me." "I am not quick at dancing, grandfather." "Aha, you're not quick! So you won't get any fire." And in addition the old man cut out a strip of flesh from his back. And so the eldest brother came back without a light. 
 The second brother began to grumble at him. "Eh, how clumsy you are, brother," he said. "You have not brought us a 
 
 light. I will go myself." He came to the beekeeper's house and cried: "Grandfather, please give us a light!" "Well, my boy, sing me a song." "I don't know any." "Well, then, tell me a tale." "I don't know any tales, grandfather." The old man cut a strip of flesh from this brother's back too and sent him back without a light. Now the two clever brothers just stared at each other. 
 The simpleton watched them and said: "Eh you, my clever brothers, you have not yet got a light!" And he went himself to get one. He came to the house and said: "Grandfather, have you got a light?" The old man said: "First dance for me," "I do not know how, grandfather." "In that case, tell me a tale." "That I can do," said the simpleton, sitting down on a straw mat. "But mind you," he went on, "sit opposite me, listen, and do not interrupt me; if you do interrupt me, I will cut three strips of flesh from your back." The old man sat opposite him, with the bald spot on his head turned to the sun-and he had a huge bald spot. The simpleton cleared his throat and began his tale: "Now listen to me, grandfather." "I am listening, my light." 
 "I had a piebald horse, little grandfather. I used it to drive to the forest for wood. One day I sat on it with my ax stuck in my belt. The horse trotted-trot, trot-and the ax thumped on its back, thump, thump. It thumped and thumped and cut off the horse's rump. Now listen, grandfather," said the simpleton, giving the old man a slap on his bald spot with a mitten. "I am listening, my light." 
 "I rode for another three years on the remaining front part of the horse, and then I happened to see my horse's rump in a meadow: it was walking there, nibbling grass. I caught it and sewed it back to the front of my horse and rode on for another three years. Listen, grandfather!" he said, again slapping the bald spot with his mitten. "I am listening, my light!" 
 "I rode and I rode," the simpleton went on, "till I came to a forest. There I saw a tall oak tree; I began to climb up it and got to heaven. There I found that cattle were cheap, only mosquitoes and flies were expensive; so I climbed down to the ground, caught two bagfuls of mosquitoes and flies, slung the 
 
 
 
 bags on my back, and again climbed up to heaven. I put down my bags and began to hand out their contents to sinful mortals: I gave to each a fly and a mosquito and took a cow and a calf in exchange; I gathered up so much cattle that it could not be counted. Then I drove the cattle to the place where I had climbed up, and discovered that someone had cut down the oak. I was distressed and wondered how I could get down from heaven. Finally I made up my mind to make a rope reaching to earth; for that purpose I slaughtered all my cattle, made a long strap, and began to clamber down. I clambered and clambered and found I was short a piece of strap about as long as your cabin, grandfather, and I was afraid to jump. Listen, grandfather!" And again the simpleton slapped the bald spot with his mitten. "I am listening, my light." 
 "Luckily a peasant was winnowing oats; the husks flew up and I caught them and braided a rope of them. Suddenly a strong wind arose and began to shake me to and fro, now toward Moscow, now toward Petersburg; my rope of husk broke and the wind threw me into a bog. I sank into the mire up to my neck. I wanted to crawl out, but could not. A duck built a nest on my head. Then a wolf took to coming to the bog to eat eggs. I somehow managed to reach a hand out of the mire and seized the wolf's tail while he stood beside me; I seized it and cried loudly: 'Tiu-lu-lu-lu!' The wolf dragged me out of the mire. Are you listening, grandfather?" asked the simpleton, giving the old man another slap on his bald pate with the mitten. "I am listening, my light." 
 The simpleton saw that he was not getting anywhere; the tale was finished, and the old man had kept his word and had not interrupted him. So in order to provoke the old man, the simpleton began another tale: "My grandfather was riding on your grandfather." "No, it was my grandfather who rode horseback on yours!" the old man interrupted. The simpleton was glad; that was all he wanted. He knocked down the old man and cut three strips of flesh from his back; then he took some fire and brought it to his brothers. They made a fire, put the pot of gruel on a tripod, and began to cook. When the gruel is ready, the tale will continue; for the time being it is ended. 
 
 
 

