
 IN A certain KINGDOM in a certain land there lived a peasant and his wife. They lived richly, had plenty of everything, and possessed a large fortune. One day as they sat together the husband said: "We have plenty of everything, but we have no children. Let us pray to God; perhaps He will bless us with a child at least in our last years, in our old age." They prayed to God, and the woman became pregnant; and when her time came she gave birth to a boy. A year went by, and two years, and three years, but the babe's legs did not move as legs move; eighteen years went by, and still he sat as though legless. 
 One day the father and mother went to mow hay and the son remained alone. An old beggar came to him asking for alms. "Little host, give an old man alms for Christ's sake." He answered: "Holy old man, I cannot give you alms, I am legless." The old beggar entered the house. "Now," he said, "rise from your bed, give me a pitcher." Ilya gave him a pitcher. "Now," said the old man, "bring me some water." The boy brought water and handed it to the old man, saying: "Here, holy old man." The old man gave it back to him, saying: "Drink all the water in this pitcher!" Then he sent Hya again for water, saying: "Bring me another pitcher of water." As the boy went to get the water, he made his way along by holding to the trees; whenever he grasped a tree, he tore it out by the roots. The holy old man asked him: "Do you feel strength in yourself?" "I do, holy old man. I now have great strength: if a ring were fastened to the world, I could turn it over." When he brought the second pitcher of water, the old man drank half of it and gave him the other half to drink; his strength lessened. "The strength you have now," said the old man, "will be just the right amount." Then the old man prayed to God and went away, saying: "Stay here with God." 
 
 The boy grew weary of lying about, so he went to dig in the woods, to try his strength. And the people were terrified at the amount of work he did and the huge quantity of wood he piled up. The father and mother came back from hay mowing and saw that the whole forest was dug up, and they wondered who had done it. They came closer. The wife said to her husband: "Look, it is our Ilyushenka who is digging!" "You fool," he answered, "how can it be Ilyushenka? What nonsense!" They came up to the boy. "All my God, how did this come about?" Ilya said: "A holy old man came to me and asked for alms. I said to him: 'Holy old man, I cannot give you alms, because I have no legs.' So he entered the house and told me to rise from my bed and to give him a pitcher. I got up and gave him a pitcher. Then he told me to bring him water. I brought him water and handed it to him. He told me to drink all the water in the pitcher. I drank it, and a great strength arose in me." 
 The peasants gathered in the street and said among themselves: "Behold what a mighty champion he has become, how much he has dug up! We must tell people about him in the city." And so the sovereign learned about this mighty champion; he summoned Ilya to his presence, found him to his liking, and dressed him in a fitting garment. He pleased everyone and began to serve well. The sovereign said: "You are a mighty champion; could you lift up my castle?" "Yes, Your Majesty, I can even raise it on one side, just the way you want it." 
 The tsar had a fair daughter, so beautiful that no mind can imagine her nor pen describe her. And she was to Ilya's liking, and he wanted to marry her. 
 One day the tsar went to another kingdom, to another king. He came to that king, and that king too had a very handsome daughter, and a twelve-headed dragon took to flying to her and he withered her young life; she was completely worn out. The tsar said to that king: "I have a mighty champion who will kill the twelve-headed dragon." The king said: "Please send him to me." When the tsar returned he said to his tsarina: "A twelve-headed dragon took to flying to such and such a king's daughter, he sucked her young life dry, he wore her out alto- 
 
 gether." And then he said: "Ilya Ivanovich, could you not help her, could you not slay that dragon?" "Yes, Your Majesty, I can and will slay him." 
 The tsar said: "You will go by stagecoach and follow such and such roads." "I will go on horseback, alone. Give me a horse." "Go to the stable," said the tsar. "Choose any horse you like." But in another room the tsar's daughter begged him: "Do not go, Ilya Ivanovich. The twelve-headed dragon will slay you, you won't be able to vanquish him." He said: "Please do not fear anything; I shall return safe and sound." He went to the stable to choose a horse. He came to the first horse, put his hands on him, and the horse stumbled. He tried all the horses in the stable; whenever he put his hand on one, it stumbled- not one could bear the weight of his hand. He came to the very last horse, which stood neglected in a corner, and struck him on the back with his hand; the horse only neighed. And Ilya said: "Here is my faithful servant; he did not stumble." He went to the tsar: "Your Majesty, I have chosen a horse, a faithful servant." He was sent off with honors and prayers were said for his safety. 
 He sat on his good steed and rode for a long time or a short time, till he came to a mountain; it was a very steep and very high mountain, and it was all covered with sand; he rode up it with great effort. On the mountain stood a post, and on the post three roads were indicated, and the inscription said: "If you follow the first road, you will be sated, but your steed will be hungry. If you follow the second road, your horse will be sated, but you yourself will be hungry. If you follow the third road, you will be slain." He followed the third road, although the inscription said that on this road he would be slain; for he had confidence in himself. For a long time or a short time he rode in thick forests, so thick that one could not see anything. Then a wide clearing appeared in the forest, and on the clearing stood a little hut. He rode up to the hut and said: "Little hut, little hut, turn your back to the forest, and your front to me." The hut turned around, stood with its back to the forest and its front to him. He climbed down from his good steed, and tied him to a post. Baba Yaga heard this and said: "Who is that 
 
 insolent fellow? My father and my grandfather never heard of a Russian breath, but now I will see a Russian being with my own eyes." 
 She struck the door with her wand and the door opened. She took a curved scythe, and tried to take the champion by his neck and cut off his head. "Wait, Baba Yaga," he said, "I will show you." He tore the scythe out of her hands, seized her by her hair, struck her, and said: "You should first ask me of what lineage I am, of what birth and what character, and whither I am going." So she asked him: "Of what family are you, of what birth, and whither are you going?" "My name is Ilya Ivanovich, and I am going to such and such a place." She said: "Ilya Ivanovich, please come into my room." He entered her room; she seated him at table, served him meat and drink, and sent her maid to heat a bath for him. He ate and he steamed himself, stayed two days in Baba Yaga's house, and made ready to go on his way again. Baba Yaga said: "I will give you a letter to my sister telling her not to harm you but to receive you with honor. Otherwise she will slay you as soon as she sees you." She gave him the letter and bade him farewell with fitting honors. 
 The champion mounted his good steed and rode through thick forests; he rode for a long time or a short time. The forest was so thick that one could not see in it. He came to a clearing, a wide clearing, and on it stood a hut. He rode up to the hut, climbed down from his good steed, and tied him to a post. Baba Yaga heard him tying his steed and cried: "What is this? My father and my grandfather never heard of a Russian breath, and now I will see a Russian being with my own eyes." She struck the door with her wand and the door opened. She swung her saber at Ilya's neck, but he said: "You cannot fight with me; here is a letter your sister gave me." She read the letter and received him honorably: "Welcome, be my guest," she said. Ilya Ivanovich came in. She seated him at table, served him meats, wines, and sweets, and sent her maid to heat a bath for him. Having eaten, he went to steam himself in the bath. He stayed with Baba Yaga for two days and took a rest; his good steed also took a rest. When he mounted his good 
 
 
 
 steed, she saw him off with honor. She said: "Now, Ilya Ivanovich, you will not be able to continue on your way. Solovey the Robber is lurking very near here; his nest is built on seven oaks; he will not let you come within thirty versts of him, he will deafen you with his whistling." 
 He rode for a long time or a short time, till he came to a place where he heard the whistle of Solovey the Robber, and when he came up halfway, his steed stumbled. He said: "My good steed, do not stumble! Serve me." He rode up to Solovey the Robber, who kept on whistling. "When he came up to the robber's nest, Ilya took an arrow, drew his bow, and shot at him-and Solovey fell from his nest. When he was on the ground, Ilya struck him once, in such a way that he stunned him but did not slay him; then he put the robber in his saddlebag and rode to the king's castle. 
 He was seen from the castle and there someone said: "Solovey the Robber is carrying someone in his saddlebag." The champion rode up to the castle and handed the guard a paper. His paper was given to the king, who read it and ordered him to be admitted. The king said to Ilya Ivanovich: "Order Solovey the Robber to whistle." Solovey the Robber said: "You should give food and drink to Solovey the Robber; my mouth is parched." They brought him wine and he said: "What is a quart to me? Better bring me a good-sized cask." They brought a cask of wine and poured it into a pail. Solovey drank it in one gulp and said: "If Solovey the Robber had two pails more, he would drink them too." But he was not given any more. The king said again to Ilya: "Now order him to whistle." Ilya ordered Solovey to whistle, but he took the king and all his family under his arm, saying: "I must keep you here or he would deafen you." When Solovey the Robber whistled, Ilya Ivanovich could hardly stop him; he had to strike him with his mace, or all of them would have fallen to the ground. 
 The king said to Ilya Ivanovich: "Will you do me the service that I ask you? There is a twelve-headed dragon that flies to my daughter; will you slay him?" Ilya said: "At your service, Your Royal Majesty! I will do whatever you ask me." "Please, Ilya Ivanovich, at such and such an hour the dragon will come 
 
 to see my daughter, so do your best." "At your service, Your Royal Majesty." 
 The princess lay in her room; on the stroke of twelve the dragon came to her. The dragon and Ilya began to fight; each time Ilya struck, one of the dragon's heads rolled-one stroke, one head off. They fought for a long time or a short time, till only one head remained. And Ilya cut off the dragon's last head: he struck it with his mace and smashed it altogether. The princess rose up joyfully, came to Ilya, and thanked him; then she told her father and mother that the dragon was dead, that Ilya had cut off all his heads. The king said: "I thank you. Won't you serve for some time in my kingdom?" "No," said Ilya, "I want to go to my own land." The king let him go, giving him great honors, and he rode back on the same road by which he had come. When he came to the first Baba Yaga to spend the night in her house, she received him with honor; when he came to the second, she too received him with all honor. He came to his own land and gave the tsar a paper from the king whom he had aided. The tsar received him with honor, and the tsar's daughter had waited for him with great impatience. "Now, father, may I become his wife?" she said. Her father did not oppose her will. "Well, if such is your desire, marry him." They wedded and are living to this day. 
 

