
 ONCE UPON A time there lived an old man and his wife. They built weirs in the river and put a basket in each One. Then they went home. On the way the old woman saw a treasure and immediately began to tell everyone about it. What could the old man do? He decided to play a trick on her, went to the field, caught a hare, then stopped at the river to look at his traps. He found a pike in one of them. He took it out and put the hare in its place; then he carried the pike into the field and laid it among the peas. When he got home he asked his wife to go with him to pick peas. 
 They made ready and went. On the way the old man said: "There is a rumor that fish are now living in the fields and that the beasts have moved to the river." "What nonsense, old man!" They came to the field. "But the rumor is true!" cried the old man. "Look here, a pike has crawled into our peas." 
 
 "Catch him!" The old man took the pike, put it into his basket, and said: "Now let us go to the river and see whether there is anything in our traps." He took out a trap and said: "Now you see? What people are saying is true! Look, a hare has fallen into the trap!" "Hold him tight or he may jump back into the water." The old man took the hare and said: "Now let us go and get our treasure." 
 They took all the money and drove home. On the way, the old woman saw a bear tearing a cow apart and said: "Hey, old man, look, there is a bear tearing à cow to pieces." "Be quiet, wife! That is the devil thrashing our barin." They came home; the old man went to hide the money, and the old woman ran to tell the news to her neighbor. The neighbor told it to the steward, and the steward told it to the barin, who called the old man before him and said: "Have you found a treasure?" "Why, no!" "But your wife says you have." "Well, it won't be her first lie." The barin sent for the old woman and asked her: "Is it true, old woman, that you have found a treasure?" "We have, little father." "Then why, old man, do you say that you have not?" asked the barin. The old man turned to his wife and said: "You foolish woman, why are you lying? Where have we found a treasure?" "What do you mean, where? In the field, of course; it was on the same day that we found a pike swimming in the peas and a hare caught in our fish trap." "Ah, you old hag, did anyone ever see a pike living in a field, and a hare swimming in the water?" "Have you forgotten everything? And at the same time a devil was thrashing our barin!" The barin boxed her ears: "What are you raving about, fool! When did the devil thrash me?" "But he did, I swear he did!" The barin grew angry, ordered rods to be brought in, and had her punished in his presence. The good woman was laid down and lashed; but she kept saying the same things even under the blows. The barin spat with disgust and drove the old couple out of his house. 
 

