
 IN A CERTAIN land in a certain kingdom, there lived a king called Vyslav Andronovich. He had three sons: the first was Prince Dimitri, the second Prince Vasily, and the third Prince Ivan. King Vyslav Andronovich had a garden so rich that there was no finer one in any kingdom. In this garden there grew all kinds of precious trees, with and without fruit; one special apple tree was the king's favorite, for all the apples it bore were golden. 
 The firebird took to visiting King Vyslav's garden; her wings were golden and her eyes were like oriental crystals. Every night she flew into the garden, perched on King Vyslav's favor- 
 
 ite apple tree, picked several golden apples from it, and then flew away. King Vyslav Andronovich was greatly distressed that the firebird had taken so many apples from his golden apple tree. So he summoned his three sons to him and said: "My beloved children, which of you can catch the firebird in my garden? To him who captures her alive I will give half my kingdom during my life, and all of it upon my death!" His sons, the princes, answered in one voice: "Your Majesty, gracious sovereign, little father, with great joy will we try to take the firebird alive!" 
 The first night Prince Dimitri went to keep watch in the garden. He sat under the apple tree from which the firebird had been picking apples, fell asleep, and did not hear her come, though she picked much golden fruit. Next morning King Vyslav Andronovich summoned his son Prince Dimitri to him and asked: "Well, my beloved son, did you see the firebird or not?" The prince answered: "No, gracious sovereign, little father! She did not come last night!" 
 The next night Prince Vasily went to keep watch in the garden. He sat under the same apple tree; he stayed one hour, then another hour, and finally fell so sound asleep that he did not hear the firebird come, though she picked many apples. In the morning King Vyslav summoned his son to him and asked: "Well, my beloved son, did you see the firebird or not?" "Gracious sovereign, little father, she did not come last night!" 
 The third night Prince Ivan went to keep watch in the garden and sat under the same apple tree; he sat one hour, a second hour, and a third-then suddenly the whole garden was illumined as if by many lights. The firebird had come; she perched on the apple tree and began to pick apples. Prince Ivan stole up to her so softly that he was able to seize her tail. But he could not hold the firebird herself; she tore herself from his grasp and flew away. In Prince Ivan's hand there remained only one feather of her tail, to which he held very fast. In the morning, as soon as King Vyslav awoke from his sleep, Prince Ivan went to him and gave him the feather of the firebird. King Vyslav was greatly pleased that his youngest son had succeeded in getting at least one feather of the firebird. 
 
 This feather was so marvelously bright that when it was placed in a dark room it made the whole room shine as if it were lit up by many candles. King Vyslav put the feather in his study as a keepsake, to be treasured forever. From that moment the firebird stopped visiting the garden. 
 Once again King Vyslav summoned his sons and said: "My beloved children, set out. I give you my blessing. Find the firebird and bring her to me alive; and that which I promised before will go to him who brings me the firebird." At this time Princes Dimitri and Vasily bore a grudge against their youngest brother, Ivan, because he had succeeded in tearing a feather from the firebird's tail; they accepted their father's blessing and together went forth to seek the firebird. But Prince Ivan too began to beg for his father's blessing that he might go forth. King Vyslav said to him: "My beloved son, my dear child, you are still young and unused to such long and hard journeys; why should you depart from my house? Your brothers have gone; what if you too leave me and all three of you do not return for a long time? I am old now and I walk in the shadow of the Lord; if during your absence the Lord takes my life, who will rule the kingdom in my place? A rebellion might break out, or dissension among the people, and there would be no one to pacify them; or an enemy might approach our land, and there would be no one to command our troops." But no matter how King Vyslav tried to hold Prince Ivan back, he finally had to yield to his son's insistent prayer. Prince Ivan received his father's blessing, chose a horse, and set out on his way; and he rode on and on, himself not knowing whither. 
 He rode near and far, high and low, along by-paths and by-ways-for speedily a tale is spun, but with less speed a deed is done-until he came to a wide, open field, a green meadow. And there in the field stood a pillar, and on the pillar these words were written: "Whosoever goes from this pillar on the road straight before him will be cold and hungry. Whosoever goes to the right side will be safe and sound, but his horse will be killed. And whosoever goes to the left side will be killed himself, but his horse will be safe and sound." Prince Ivan read this inscription and went to the right, thinking that 
 
 although his horse might he killed, he himself would remain alive and would in time get another horse. 
 He rode one day, then a second day, then a third. Suddenly an enormous gray wolf came toward him and said: "Ah, so it's you, young lad, Prince Ivan! You saw the inscription on the pillar that said that your horse would be killed if you came this way. Why then have you come hither?" When he had said these words, he tore Prince Ivan's horse in twain and ran off to one side. 
 Prince Ivan was sorely grieved for his horse; he shed bitter tears and then continued on foot. He walked a whole day and was utterly exhausted. He was about to sit down and rest for a while when all at once the gray wolf caught up with him and said: "I am sorry for you, Prince Ivan, because you are exhausted from walking; I am also sorry that I ate your good horse. Therefore mount me, the gray wolf, and tell me whither to carry you and for what purpose." Prince Ivan told the gray wolf what errand he had come on; and the gray wolf darted off with him more swiftly than a horse, and after some time, just at nightfall, reached a low stone wall. There he stopped and said: "Now, Prince Ivan, climb down from me, the gray wolf, and climb over that stone wall; behind the wall you will find a garden, and in the garden the firebird is sitting in a golden cage. Take the firebird, but touch not the golden cage; if you take the cage, you will not escape, you will be caught at once!" 
 Prince Ivan climbed over the stone wall into the garden, saw the firebird in the golden cage, and was utterly charmed by the beauty of the cage. He took the bird out and started back across the garden, but on his way he changed his mind and said to himself: "Why have I taken the firebird without her cage- where will I put her?" He returned, and the moment he took down the golden cage, a thunderous noise resounded through the whole garden, for there were strings tied to the cage. The guards woke up at once, rushed into the garden, caught Prince Ivan with the firebird, and led him before their king, whose name was Dolmat. King Dolmat was furious at Prince Ivan and cried in a loud and angry voice: "How now! Are you not ashamed to steal, young lad! Who are you, from what land do 
 
 you come, what is your father's name, and what is your own name?" 
 Prince Ivan answered: "I am from Vyslav's kingdom. I am the son of king Vyslav Andronovich, and my name is Prince Ivan. Your Firebird took to visiting our garden night after night; she plucked golden apples from my father's favorite apple tree and spoiled almost the whole tree. For that reason my father sent me to find the firebird and bring her to him." 
 "Oh, young lad, Prince Ivan," said King Dolmat, "is it fitting to do what you have done? If you had come to me, I would have given you the firebird with honor. But now, will you like it if I send to all the kingdoms to proclaim how dishonorably you have acted in my kingdom? However, listen, Prince Ivan! If you will do me a service, if you go beyond thirty lands, to the thirtieth kingdom, and get for me the horse with the golden mane from the realm of King Afron, I will forgive you your offense and hand the firebird over to you with great honor. But if you do not perform this service, I shall let it be known in all the kingdoms that you are a dishonorable thief." Prince Ivan left King Dolmat in great distress, promising to get for him the horse with the golden mane. 
 He came to the gray wolf and told him everything that King Dolmat had said. "Oh, young lad, Prince Ivan," said the gray wolf, "why did you not heed my words, why did you take the golden cage?" "It is true, I am guilty before you," answered Prince Ivan. "Well, let it be so," said the gray wolf. "Sit on me, the gray wolf; I will carry you where you have to go." 
 Prince Ivan mounted to the gray wolf's back, and the wolf ran fast as an arrow. He ran till nightfall, a short distance or a long one, until he came to King Afron's kingdom. And reaching the white-walled royal stables, the gray wolf said to Prince Ivan: "Go, Prince Ivan, into those white-walled stables-all the stable boys on guard are now sleeping soundly-and take the horse with the golden mane. However, on the wall there hangs a golden bridle; do not take it, otherwise there will be trouble!" 
 Prince Ivan entered the white-walled stables, took the steed, and began to retrace his steps; but he noticed the golden bridle 
 
 on the wall, and was so charmed with it that he removed it from its nail. And he had no sooner removed it than a thunderous clatter and noise resounded through all the stables, for there were strings tied to that bridle. The stable boys on guard woke up at once, rushed in, caught Prince Ivan, and brought him before King Afron. King Afron began to question him. "Young lad," he said, "tell me from what kingdom you are come, whose son you are, and what your name may be." Prince Ivan answered: "I am from Vyslav's kingdom. I am King Vyslav Andronovich's son, and I am called Prince Ivan." 
 "Oh, young lad, Prince Ivan," said King Afron, "is the deed you have done befitting an honorable knight? If you had come to me I would have given you the horse with the golden mane in all honor. But now, will you like it if I send to all the kingdoms to proclaim how dishonorably you have behaved in my kingdom? However, listen, Prince Ivan! If you do me a service, if you go beyond the thrice ninth land, to the thrice tenth kingdom, and get for me Princess Elena the Fair, with whom I have been in love, heart and soul, for long years, but whom I cannot win for my bride, I will forgive you your offense and give you the horse with the golden mane in all honor. But if you do not perform this service for me, I shall let it be known in all the kingdoms that you are a dishonorable thief, and will put down in writing how badly you have behaved in my kingdom." Then Prince Ivan promised King Afron to get Princess Elena the Fair for him and left the palace, weeping bitterly. 
 He came to the gray wolf and told him everything that had happened to him. "Oh, young lad, Prince Ivan," said the gray wolf, "why did you not heed my words, why did you take the golden bridle?" "It is true, I am guilty before you," answered Prince Ivan. "Well, let it be so!" said the gray wolf. "Sit on me, the gray wolf; I will carry you where you have to go." 
 Prince Ivan mounted to the gray wolf's back, and the wolf ran fast as an arrow; he ran as beasts run in fairy tales, so that in a very short time he arrived in the kingdom of Elena the Fair. And reaching the golden fence that surrounded the wonderful garden, the wolf said to Prince Ivan: "Now, Prince Ivan, climb down from me, the gray wolf, and go back along the 
 
 same road that we took to come here, and wait for me in the open field under the green oak." 
 Prince Ivan went where he was bid. But the gray wolf sat near the golden fence and waited till Princess Elena the Fair should come to take her walk in the garden. Toward evening, when the sun began to set in the west, and the air became cool, Princess Elena the Fair went to walk in the garden with her governesses and ladies-in-waiting. She entered the garden, and when she came near the place where the gray wolf was sitting behind the fence, he quickly jumped across the fence into the garden, caught the princess, jumped back again, and ran with all his strength and power. He came to the green oak in the open field where Prince Ivan was waiting for him and said: "Prince Ivan, quickly seat yourself on me, the gray wolf!" Prince Ivan seated himself and the gray wolf darted off with him and the princess toward King Afron's kingdom. 
 The nurses and governesses and ladies-in-waiting who had been walking in the garden with the beautiful Princess Elena ran at once to the palace and sent men-at-arms to pursue the gray wolf; but no matter how fast they ran, they could not overtake him, and so they turned back. 
 Sitting on the gray wolf with the beautiful Princess Elena, Prince Ivan came to love her with all his heart, and she to love Prince Ivan. And when the gray wolf came to King Afron's kingdom, and Prince Ivan had to lead the beautiful princess to the palace and give her to King Afron, he grew extremely sad and began to weep bitter tears. The gray wolf asked him: "Why are you weeping, Prince Ivan?" And Prince Ivan answered: "Gray wolf, my friend, why should I not weep and grieve? I have come to love the beautiful Princess Elena with all my heart, and now I must give her to King Afron in return for the horse with the golden mane; if I do not give her to him, he will dishonor me in all the kingdoms." 
 "I have served you much, Prince Ivan," said the gray wolf, "and I will do you this service too. Listen to me, Prince Ivan! I will turn myself into the beautiful Princess Elena, and do you lead me to King Afron and take from him the horse with the golden mane; he will think me the real princess. And later, 
 
 when you have mounted the horse with the golden mane and gone far away, I shall ask King Afron to let me walk in the open field. And when he lets me go with the nurses and governesses and ladies-in-waiting, and I am with them in the open field, remember me, and once again I shall be with you." The gray wolf said these words, struck himself against the damp earth, and turned into Princess Elena the Fair, so that there was no way of knowing that he was not the princess. Prince Ivan took the gray wolf, went to King Afron's palace, and told the real Princess Elena to wait for him outside the town. 
 When Prince Ivan came to King Afron with the false Elena the Fair, the king was greatly rejoiced to receive the treasure that he had so long desired. He accepted the false princess and gave Prince Ivan the horse with the golden mane. 
 Prince Ivan mounted the horse and rode out of the town; he had seated Princess Elena the Fair behind him, and they set out in the direction of King Dolmat's kingdom. As for the gray wolf, he lived with King Afron one day, a second day, then a third, in the place of Elena the Fair; and on the fourth he went to King Afron and asked his permission to take a walk in the open field, to dispel the cruel sadness and grief that lay on him. And King Afron said to him: "Ah, my beautiful Princess Elena! For you I will do anything; I will even let you go to walk in the open field!" And at once he commanded the governesses and nurses and all the ladies-in-waiting to walk with the beautiful princess in the open field. 
 Meanwhile Prince Ivan rode along by-ways and by-paths with Elena the Fair, conversed with her, and forgot about the gray wolf. But then he remembered. "Ah," he said, "where is my gray wolf?" Suddenly, as though he had come from nowhere, the gray wolf stood before Prince Ivan and said: "Prince Ivan, sit on me, the gray wolf, and let the beautiful princess ride on the horse with the golden mane." 
 Prince Ivan sat on the gray wolf and they set out for King Dolmat's kingdom. They traveled a long time or a short time, and having come to the kingdom, stopped three versts from the town. Prince Ivan began to implore the gray wolf, saying: "Listen to me, gray wolf, my dear friend! You have done many 
 
 a service for me, do me this last one. Could you not turn yourself into a horse with a golden mane instead of this one? For I long to have myself a horse with a golden mane." 
 Suddenly the gray wolf struck himself against the damp earth and turned into a horse with a golden mane; Prince Ivan left Princess Elena the Fair in the green meadow, bestrode the gray wolf, and went to the palace of King Dolmat. And when King Dolmat saw Prinpe Ivan riding on the horse with the golden mane he was overjoyed and at once came out of his apartment, met the prince in the great courtyard, kissed him on his sweet lips, took him by the right hand, and led him into the white-walled palace hall. In honor of this joyous occasion King Dolmat gave a great feast, and the guests sat at oaken tables with checked tablecloths; they ate, drank, laughed, and enjoyed themselves for exactly two days. And on the third day King Dolmat handed to Prince Ivan the firebird in the golden cage. The prince took the firebird, went outside the town, mounted the golden-maned horse together with Princess Elena the Fair, and set out for his native land, the kingdom of King Vyslav Andronovich. 
 As for King Dolmat, he decided on the next day to break in his golden-maned horse in the open field; he had the horse saddled, then mounted him and rode off; but as soon as he began to spur the beast, it threw him, and turning back into the gray wolf, darted off and overtook Prince Ivan. "Prince Ivan," said he, "mount me, the gray wolf, and let Princess Elena the Fair ride on the horse with the golden mane." 
 Prince Ivan sat on the gray wolf and they continued on their way. The moment the gray wolf brought Prince Ivan to the place where he had torn the horse asunder, he stopped and said: "Well, Prince Ivan, I have served you long enough in faith and in truth. Upon this spot I tore your horse in twain, and to this spot I have brought you back safe and sound. Climb down from me, the gray wolf; now you have a horse with a golden mane, mount him and go wherever you have to go; I am no longer your servant." After he had said these words the gray wolf ran off, and Prince Ivan wept bitterly and set out on his way with the beautiful princess. 
 
 
 
 He rode with Princess Elena for a long time or a short time; when they were still about twenty versts from his own land, he stopped, dismounted from his horse, and lay down with the beautiful princess to rest under a tree from the heat of the sun; he tied the horse with the golden mane to the same tree, and put the cage with the firebird by his side. The two lovers lay on the soft grass, spdke amorous words to each other, and fell fast asleep. 
 At that very moment Prince Ivan's brothers, Prince Dimitri and Prince Vasily, having traveled through various kingdoms and having failed to find the firebird, were on their way back to their native land; they were returning empty-handed. They chanced to come upon their brother, Prince Ivan, lying asleep beside Princess Elena the Fair. Seeing the golden-maned horse on the grass and the firebird in the golden cage, they were sorely tempted, and decided to slay their brother. Prince Dimitri drew his sword from its scabbard, stabbed Prince Ivan, and cut him in little pieces; then he awakened Princess Elena the Fair and began to question her. "Lovely maiden," he said, "from what kingdom have you come? Who is your father, and what is your name?" 
 The beautiful Princess Elena, seeing Prince Ivan dead, was terribly frightened and began to weep bitter tears, and amid her tears she said: "I am Princess Elena the Fair; I was carried off by Prince Ivan, whom you have brought to an evil end. If you were valiant knights you would have gone with him into the open field and conquered him in fair combat; but you slew him while he was asleep, and what praise will that get you? A sleeping man is the same as a dead man!" 
 Then Prince Dimitri put his sword to the heart of Princess Elena and said to her: "Listen to me, Elena the Fair! You are now in our hands; we shall take you to our father, King Vyslav Andronovich, and you must tell him that we captured you as well as the firebird and the horse with the golden mane. If you do not promise to say this, I shall put you to death at once!" The beautiful Princess Elena was frightened by the threat of death; she promised them and swore by everything sacred that she would speak as they commanded. Then Prince Dimitri and 
 
 Prince Vasily cast lots to see who should get Princess Elena and who the horse with the golden mane. And it fell out that the beautiful princess went to Prince Vasily and the horse with the golden mane to Prince Dimitri. Then Prince Vasily took the beautiful Princess Elena, and seated her on his good horse, and Prince Dimitri mounted the horse with the golden mane and took the firebird to give to his father, King Vyslav Andronovich, and they all set out on their way. 
 Prince Ivan lay dead on that spot exactly thirty days; then the gray wolf came upon him and knew him by his odor. He wanted to help the prince, to revive him, but he did not know how to do it. At that moment the gray wolf saw a raven with two young ravens flying above the body, making ready to swoop down and eat the flesh of Prince Ivan. The gray wolf hid behind a bush; and as soon as the young ravens lighted on the ground and began to eat the body of Prince Ivan, he leaped from behind the bush, caught one young raven, and prepared to tear him in twain. Then the raven flew to the ground, sat at some distance from the gray wolf, and said to him: "Oh gray wolf, do not touch my young child; he has done nothing to you." 
 "Listen to me, raven," said the gray wolf. "I shall not touch your child, and will let him go, safe and sound, if you will do me a service. Fly beyond the thrice ninth land, to the thrice tenth kingdom, and bring me the water of death and the water of life." Thereupon the raven said to the gray wolf: "I will do this service for you, but touch not my son." Having said these words, the raven took wing and was soon out of sight. On the third day the raven came back carrying two phials, one containing the water of life, the other the water of death, and she gave these phials to the gray wolf. 
 The gray wolf took the phials, tore the young raven in twain, sprinkled him with the water of death, and the young raven's body grew together; he sprinkled him with the water of life, and the young raven shook his wings, and flew away. Then the gray wolf sprinkled Prince Ivan with the water of death, and his body grew together; he sprinkled him with the water of life, and Prince Ivan stood up and said: "Ah, I have slept very long!" 
 
 The gray wolf answered him: "Yes, Prince Ivan, you would have slept forever had it not been for me: your brothers cut you in pieces and carried off the beautiful Princess Elena and the horse with the golden mane and the firebird. Now hasten as fast as you can to your native land; your brother Prince Vasily is this very day to marry your bride, Princess Elena the Fair. And in order to get there quickly, you had better sit on me, the gray wolf." Prince Ivan mounted the gray wolf; the wolf ran with him to King Vsylav Andronovich's kingdom, and after a short time or a long time reached the town. 
 Prince Ivan dismounted from the gray wolf, walked into the town, and having arrived at the palace, found that his brother Prince Vasily was indeed wedding the beautiful Princess Elena that very day; he had returned with her from the ceremony and was already sitting at the feast. Prince Ivan entered the palace, and no sooner did Elena the Fair see him than she sprang up from the table, began to kiss his sweet lips, and cried out: "This is my beloved bridegroom, Prince Ivan-not the evildoer who sits here at the table!" 
 Then King Vyslav Andronovich rose from his place and began to question Princess Elena. "What is the meaning of the words you have spoken?" he demanded. Elena the Fair told him the whole truth about what had happened-how Prince Ivan had won her, the horse with the golden mane, and the firebird, how his older brothers had killed him in his sleep, and how they had forced her under threat of death to say that they had won all this. King Vyslav grew terribly angry at Prince Dimitri and Prince Vasily and threw them into a dungeon; but Prince Ivan married Princess Elena the Fair and began to live with her in such true friendship and love that neither of them could spend a single minute without the other's company. 
 
 

