
 THE king of A certain country lost his ring while on a drive through his capital. He at once placed a notice in the newspapers, promising that whoever might find and return the ring would receive a large reward in money. A simple private was lucky enough to find it. "What shall I do?" thought the soldier. "If I report my find at regimental headquarters, the whole affair will be referred to my superiors, each in his turn, from the sergeant to the company commander, from the company commander to the battalion commander, from the battalion commander to the colonel, and from the colonel to the brigadier general-there will never be an end to it. I would rather go straight to the king." 
 He came to the palace. The officer on guard asked him: "What do you want here?" "I have found the king's ring," said the soldier. "Very well, brother! I will announce you, but only on condition that I get half the reward that the king gives you." The soldier thought to himself: "For once in my life I have had a piece of luck, and now I have to share it!" However, he answered the officer on guard: "Very well, I agree. Only give me a note stating that half the reward is for you and half for me." 
 The officer gave him the note and announced him to the king. The king praised the soldier for having found the ring. "Thank you, brave soldier!" he said. "I shall give you two thousand rubles as a reward." "No, Your Royal Majesty! That is not a soldier's reward. A soldier's reward is two hundred lashes." "What a fool you are!" said the king, and ordered that the sticks be brought in. 
 The soldier began to undress, unbuttoned his tunic, and the note dropped on the floor. "What paper is that?" asked the king. "Your Majesty, that is a note stating that only half the reward is for me, and that the other half must go to the officer on guard." The king laughed, called the officer on guard, and ordered that he be given a hundred lashes. The order was car- 
 
 ried out, and when it was time to count the last ten lashes, the soldier drew near to the king and said: "Your Majesty, since he is so greedy, I will give the other half of the reward to him too." "How kind you are!" said the king, and ordered that the officer on guard be given the second hundred lashes. After this reward the officer could hardly crawl home. As for the soldier, the king gave him an honorable discharge from the service and presented him with three thousand rubles. 
 
