 ONCE there was a king who had an only son. When the prince was small, 
 his nurses and governesses sang lullabies to him. "Prince Ivan, when 
 you grow up, you will find your bride," they would sing. "Beyond 
 thrice nine lands, in the thrice tenth kingdom, Vasilisa Kirbitievna
 sits in a tower, and her marrow flows from bone to bone." When the 
 prince had passed his fifteenth year, he began to ask the king's 
 leave to set out in search of his bride. "Whither will you go?"
 the father asked. "You are still too young." "No, father, when I 
 was little, my nurses and governesses sang lullabies to me and told 
 me where my bride lives; and now I wish to go and find her." The 
 father gave the prince his blessing and sent word to all the 
 kingdoms that his son, Prince Ivan, was setting out to find his 
 bride. 
 
 One day the prince came to a certain town, put up his horse to 
 be cared for, and went to walk in the streets. He came to 
 the square and saw that a man was being flogged with a whip. 
 "Why do you whip him?" he asked. "Because he borrowed ten 
 thousand rubles from a prominent merchant," they told him, 
 "and did not pay them back at the agreed time. As for the 
 man who redeems him, his wife will be carried off by Koshchey 
 the Deathless." The prince thought and thought and went away. 
 He walked through the town, then came to the square again, and 
 saw that the man was still being flogged; Prince Ivan took pity 
 on him and decided to redeem him. Since I have no wife, he 
 thought, no one can be taken from me. He paid the ten thousand 
 rubles and went home. Suddenly the man whom he had redeemed ran 
 after him, crying: "Thank you, Prince Ivan! If you had not 
 redeemed me, you would never have won your bride. But now I will 
 help you. Buy me a horse and a saddle at once." The prince bought
 him a horse and saddle and asked: "What is your name?" "My name is 
 Bulat the Brave," the man said. 
 They mounted their horses and set out. As soon as they 
 
 arrived in the thrice tenth kingdom, Bulat said: "Well, Prince Ivan, 
 order chickens, ducks, and geese to be bought and roasted, so that 
 there will be plenty of everything. And I will get your bride. But 
 mind you: every time I come to you, cut off the right wing of a 
 fowl and serve it to me on a plate." Bulat the Brave went straight 
 to the lofty tower where Vasilisa Kirbitievna was sitting, gently 
 threw a stone, and broke the gilded top of the tower. He ran to 
 Prince Ivan and said: "Why are you sleeping? Give me a chicken." 
 The prince cut off the right wing of a chicken and handed it to 
 him on a plate. Bulat took the plate, ran to the tower, and cried: 
 "Good day, Vasilisa Kirbitievna! Prince Ivan sends you his 
 greetings and has asked me to give you this chicken." The maiden 
 was frightened and sat in silence. But he answered himself in 
 her stead: "Good day, Bulat the Brave! Is Prince Ivan well? 
 Thank God, he is well. And why do you stand like that, Bulat the 
 Brave? Take the key, open the cupboard, drink a glass of vodka, 
 and God speed you. 
 
 Then Bulat ran to Prince Ivan. "Why are you sitting?" he said. 
 "Give me a duck." The prince cut off the right wing of a duck and 
 handed it to him on a plate. Bulat took the plate and carried it 
 to the tower. "Good day, Vasilisa Kirbitievna! Prince Ivan sends 
 you his greetings and has asked me to give you this duck." She
 sat in silence, and he answered himself in her stead: "Good day,
 Bulat the Brave! Is the prince well? Thank God, he is well. And 
 why do you stand like that, Bulat the Brave? Take the key, open
 the cupboard, drink a glass of vodka, and God speed you." Then 
 Bulat ran home and again said to Prince Ivan: "Why are you 
 sitting? Give me a goose." The prince cut off the right wing 
 of a goose and handed it to him on a plate. Bulat the Brave 
 took it to the tower. "Good day, Vasilisa Kirbitievna! Prince 
 Ivan sends his greetings and has asked me to give you this goose."
 Vasilisa Kirbitievna straightway took a key, opened a cupboard, and 
 gave him a glass of vodka. Bulat did not take the glass, but seized
 the maiden by her right hand, drew her out of the tower, and seated 
 her on Prince Ivan's horse, and the good youths galloped away at a 
 headlong pace, taking the lovely maiden with them. 
 
 Next morning King Kirbit woke up and arose, saw that the top of the 
 tower was broken and his daughter stolen, grew terribly angry, and 
 ordered pursuers to set out after her in all directions. Our 
 knights-errant rode a long time or a short time, then Bulat the 
 removed the ring from his hand, hid it, and said: "Ride on, Prince 
 Ivan; but I will turn back and look for my ring." Vasilisa Kirbitievna 
 began to beseech him: "Do not leave us, Bulat the Brave! If you wish,
 I will give you my ring." He answered: "That is impossible, Vasilisa
 Kirbitievna. My ring is priceless; my own mother gave it to me, 
 and when she gave it she said: 'Wear it, lose it not, forget not 
 your mother.' " Bulat the Brave rode back and met the pursuers on 
 the road; he straightway slew them all, leaving only one man to 
 bring the news to the king, and hastened to catch up with Prince 
 Ivan. They rode for a long time or a short time, then Bulat the 
 Brave hid his handkerchief and said: "Ah, Prince Ivan, I have lost
 my handkerchief; ride on, and I will catch up with you soon." He
 turned back, rode several versts, and met twice as many pursuers;
 he slew them all and returned to Prince Ivan. The prince asked: 
 "Have you found your handkerchief?" "I have," said Bulat. 
 Dark night overtook them. They pitched a tent; Bulat the Brave
 lay down to sleep, set Prince Ivan to guarding the tent, and said
 to him: "If anything happens, rouse me." The prince stood and stood,
 then grew tired; drowsiness overcame him, he sat down at the door of 
 the tent, and fell asleep. Suddenly Koshchey the Deathless appeared 
 and carried off Vasilisa Kirbitievna. At daybreak Prince Ivan awoke,
 saw that his bride was gone, and wept bitterly. Bulat the Brave woke
 up too and asked him: "Why are you weeping?" "How can I help weeping?
 Someone has stolen Vasilisa Kirbitievna." "I told you to keep watch. 
 This is the work of Koshchey the Deathless; let us set out to find the
 old rattlebones." They rode for a long, long time, then they beheld 
 two shepherds grazing a flock. "Whose flock is this?" they asked. Th
e shepherds answered: "It belongs to Koshchey the Deathless." Bulat 
the Brave and Prince Ivan questioned the herdsmen as to whether 
Koshchey the Deathless lived far from there, how to get to him, 
when they, the herdsmen, were accustomed to return home with the flock, 
and where it was shut up for the night. Then they climbed down from their 
horses, wrung the necks of the herdsmen, dressed themselves in the latters'
clothes, and drove the flock home; when they came to the place they stood 
at the gate. 

 Prince Ivan had a gold ring on his hand: Vasilisa Kirbitievna had 
 given it to him. And Vasilisa Kirbitievna had a goat: mornings and 
 evenings she washed in the milk of that goat. A maid came with a 
 cup, milked the goat, and turned back with the milk. Bulat took 
 the prince's ring and threw it into the cup. "Oh, my friends," 
 said the maid, "you are playing pranks." She came to Vasilisa
 Kirbitievna and complained: "The herdsmen are now making mock 
 of us; they threw a ring into the milk." The maiden answered: 
 "Leave the milk, I will strain it myself." She strained it, 
 saw the ring, and ordered the herdsmen to be brought before 
 her. The herdsmen came. "Good day, Vasilisa Kirbitievna," 
 said Bulat the Brave. "Good day, Bulat the Brave. Good day, 
 prince. How has God brought you here?" "We have come for you, 
 Vasilisa Kirbitievna. Nowhere shall you hide from us; even in 
 the depths of the sea we shall find you." She seated them at the 
 table, gave them a variety of viands to eat and wines to drink. 
 Bulat the Brave said to her: "When Koshchey returns from hunting, 
 ask him where his death is. And now it would not be a bad idea for
 us to hide." 
 
 The guests had no sooner hidden than Koshchey the Deathless came 
 flying back from the hunt. "Fie, fie!" he said. "Formerly there 
 was no breath of anything Russian here, nor could a glimpse be 
 caught of it, but now something Russian has come here in person 
 and is offending my nose." Vasilisa Kirbitievna answered him: "You 
 have been flying through Russia, and yourself have become full of it, 
 and now you fancy it is here." Koshchey ate his dinner and lay down 
 to rest. Vasilisa came to him, threw herself on his neck, and kissed 
 him and fondled him, saying: "My beloved friend, I could hardly wait 
 for you; I began to think that I would never again see you alive, that
 wild beasts had devoured you." Koshchey laughed. "You foolish woman! 
 Your hair is long, but your wit is short. How could wild beasts devour
 me?" "But where is your death 
 
 then?" "My death is in that broom that stands at the threshold." 
 As soon as Koshchey flew away, Vasilisa Kirbitievna ran to Prince Ivan. 
 Bulat the Brave asked her: "Well, where is Koshchey's death?" 
 "In that broom that stands on the threshold." 
 "No, that is a deliberate lie; you must question him more cunningly." 
 
 Vasilisa Kirbitievna thought up something: she took the broom, 
 gilded it, decorated it with many ribbons, and put it on the table. 
 When Koshchey the Deathless came home and saw the gilded broom on the 
 table, he asked her why she had arranged it so. "I could not allow your 
 death to stand thus unceremoniously at the threshold," said Vasilisa 
 Kirbitievna. "It is better to have it on the table." "Ha, ha, ha, you 
 foolish woman! Your hair is long but your wit is short. Do you think my 
 death is here?" "Where is it then?" "My death is hidden in the goat." 
 As soon as Koshchey left for the hunt, Vasilisa Kirbitievna adorned 
 the goat with ribbons and bells and gilded his horns. Koshchey saw it,
 and he laughed again and said: "Eh, you foolish woman, your hair is 
 long but your wit is short. My death is far away. In the sea there is 
 an island, on that island stands an oak, under the oak a coffer is 
 buried, in the coffer is a hare, in the hare is a duck, in the duck 
 is an egg, and in the egg is my death." Having said this, he flew off. 
 Vasilisa Kirbitievna repeated all this to Bulat the Brave and to 
 Prince Ivan; they took provisions and set out to find Koshchey's 
 death. After a long time or a short time they had used up all 
 their provisions and began to feel hungry. They happened to come 
 upon a dog with her young. "I will kill her," said Bulat the Brave, 
 "for we have nothing more to eat." "Do not kill me," begged the dog.
 "Do not make my children orphans. I will be useful to you." "Well,"
 they said, "God be with you." They walked on, and saw an eagle with 
 her eaglets sitting on an oak. Bulat the Brave said: "I will kill 
 the eagle." The eagle said: "Do not kill me, do not make my children
 orphans, I will be useful to you." "So be it," they said, "live in health." 
 They came to the wide ocean. A lobster crawled on the shore. 
 Bulat the Brave said: "I will kill him." The lobster answered: 
 
 "Do not kill me, good youth! There is not much substance in me; 
 even if you eat me, you will not be sated. The time will come when
 I may be useful to you." "Well, crawl on with God," said Bulat the
 Brave. He looked at the sea, saw a fisherman in a boat, and cried:
 "Come to shore!" The fisherman brought the boat; Prince Ivan and 
 Bulat the Brave seated themselves in it and sailed for the island.
 They reached the island and went to the oak. Bulat grasped the oak 
 with his mighty hands and tore it out by the roots. He got the 
 coffer from under the oak and opened it, and from the coffer a hare
 jumped out and ran away as fast as it could. "Ah," said Prince Ivan,
 "if we had a dog here, he would catch the hare." Lo and behold, 
 the dog was already bringing the hare. Bulat the Brave took it, 
 tore it open, and from the hare a duck flew out and soared high 
 into the sky. "Ah," said Prince Ivan, "if we had the eagle now, 
 he could catch the duck." Lo and behold, the eagle was bringing the duck.
 Bulat the Brave tore open the duck, and an egg rolled out from it 
 and fell into the sea. "Ah," said the prince, "if only the lobster
 would bring it up!" And lo and behold, the lobster was crawling 
 toward them with the egg. They took the egg, went to Koshchey 
 the Deathless, struck him on the forehead with the egg, and he 
 instantly fell sprawling to the ground and died. Prince Ivan 
 took Vasilisa Kirbitievna and they set out on their way. 
 They rode and rode. Dark night overtook them; they pitched a
 tent, and Vasilisa Kirbitievna lay down to sleep. Bulat the 
 Brave said: "Lie down too, prince, I will keep watch." At 
 midnight twelve doves came flying, struck wing against wing,
 and turned into twelve maidens. "Now, Bulat the Brave and 
 Prince Ivan," they said, "you have killed our brother, 
 Koshchey the Deathless, and stolen our sister-in-law, Vasilisa 
 Kirbitievna. But you won't profit by it. When Prince Ivan comes home,
 he will order his favorite dog to be brought out, and she will 
 break away from the dog keeper and tear the princess into little
 pieces. And he who hears this and tells it to the prince will 
 become stone to the knees." 
 Next morning Bulat the Brave roused the prince and Vasilisa
 Kirbitievna, and they made ready and set out on their 
 
 
 
 way. A second night overtook them; they pitched their tent 
 in the open field. Bulat the Brave said again: "Lie down to sleep,
 Prince Ivan, and I will keep watch." At midnight twelve doves 
 came flying, struck wing against wing, and turned into twelve
 maidens. "Well, Bulat the Brave and Prince Ivan," they said,
 "you have killed Koshchey the Deathless, our brother, and stolen 
 Vasilisa Kirbitievna, our sister-in-law, but you won't profit by 
 it. When Prince Ivan comes home, he will order his favorite horse 
 to be brought out, the horse on which he has been wont to ride 
 since childhood; the horse will break away from the groom and
 kill the prince. And he who hears this and tells it to the 
 prince will become stone to the waist." Morning came and they 
 rode on again. A third night overtook them; they stopped to 
 spend the night and pitched their tent in the open field. 
 Bulat the Brave said: "Lie down to sleep, Prince Ivan, and I
 will keep watch." Again at midnight twelve doves came flying, 
 struck wing against wing, and turned into twelve maidens. "Well,
 Bulat the Brave and Prince Ivan," they said, "you have killed 
 Koshchey the Deathless, our brother, and stolen Vasilisa Kirbitievna,
 our sister-in-law, but you won't profit by it; when Prince Ivan 
 comes home, he will order his favorite cow to be brought out, the
 cow whose milk has nourished him since childhood: she will wrench 
 herself free from the cowherd and spear the prince on her horns. 
 And he who sees and hears us and tells this to the prince, will 
 become stone altogether." When they had said this, they turned 
 into doves and flew off. 
 
 Next morning Prince Ivan and Vasilisa Kirbitievna awoke and set 
 out on their way. The prince came home, married Vasilisa 
 Kirbitievna, and after a day or two said to her: "Do you want
 me to show you my favorite dog? When I was little, I played 
 with it." Bulat the Brave took his saber, whetted it- he made it 
 very sharp-and stood near the porch. The dog was led out; it wrested 
 itself free from the dog keeper and ran straight toward the 
 porch, but Bulat swung his saber and cut the dog in twain. Prince
 Ivan was angry at him, but remembering his former services, did 
 not say a word. The next day Ivan ordered his favorite horse to
 be brought out; the horse broke his 
 
 halter, wrested himself free from the groom, and galloped 
 straight at the prince. Bulat the Brave cut off the horse's head.
 Prince Ivan grew even angrier than before and ordered Bulat 
 to be seized and hanged, but Vasilisa Kirbitievna obtained his pardon.
 "Had it not been for him," she said, "you would never have 
 won me." On the third day Prince Ivan ordered his favorite 
 cow to be brought out; she wrested herself free from the 
 cowherd and ran straight toward the prince. Bulat the 
 Brave cut off her head too. 
 Now Prince Ivan became so enraged that he refused to 
 listen to anyone; he ordered the hangman to be summoned
 and commanded that Bulat be put to death at once. "Ah, 
 Prince Ivan," Bulat said, "now that you have ordered 
 your hangman to put me to death, I would rather die by 
 my own hand. Only let me speak three speeches." Bulat 
 told him about the first night, how twelve doves came
 flying, and what they had said to him-and straightway 
 he became stone to the knees; he told about the second
 night, and became stone to the waist. Prince Ivan besought 
 him not to speak to the end. Bulat the Brave answered: "Now it
 is all the same; I am half stone, it is not worth while living 
 longer." He told about the third night and became stone altogether
 Prince Ivan put him in a separate chamber and went there every day
 with Vasilisa Kirbitievna and lamented bitterly. 
 Many years went by. One day Prince Ivan was lamenting over Bulat 
 when he heard a voice coming from the stone figure. "Why are you 
 weeping?" the voice said. "I am grieved even without your weeping." 
 "How can I help weeping? After all, it is I who destroyed you."
 "If you wish, you can save me. You have two children, a son and 
 a daughter; slay them, draw their blood, and smear my stone with
 the blood." Prince Ivan told this to Vasilisa Kirbitievna; they 
 grieved and lamented, but decided to slay their children. They
 slew them, drew their blood, and as soon as they smeared the 
 stone with it Bulat the Brave came to life. He asked the prince
 and his wife: "Are you heartbroken over your children?" "We are,
 Bulat the Brave." "Well then, let us go to their rooms." They went,
 and lo and behold, the children were alive. The father and mother were 
 overjoyed and in their joy gave a feast for all. I was at that 
 feast too, I drank mead and wine there; it ran down my mustache
 but did not go into my mouth, yet my soul was drunk and sated. 
