
 THERE WAS ONCE an old man who lived with his wife and his son named Lutonia. One day Lutonia and his father were busy in the courtyard while his mother was in the house. She wanted to remove a log from the shelf where it had been put to dry, but by accident dropped it on the hearth. She began to cry and lament in a loud voice. Her husband, hearing her cry, rushed into the house and asked her why she was weeping. The old woman said through her tears: "If our Lutoni-ushka were married, and if he had had a little son, and if this little son had been sitting near the hearth, I would have hit him with the log." The old man joined in her lamentations, repeating: "That is true, you would have hit him." And the old couple kept on crying and lamenting at the top of their lungs. 
 Lutonia came running from the yard and asked: "Why are you crying?" They told him why: "If you had been married, and if you had had a little son, and if, a few hours ago he had been sitting right here, he would have been killed by the log- it fell just on this spot, and with what a bang!" Lutonia snatched up his cap and said: "Farewell, my parents. If I find anyone more stupid than you, I shall return. If I do not find any such, do not wait for me." And he went away. 
 
 He walked and walked and saw several peasants dragging a cow into a house. "Why are you dragging this cow?" asked Lutonia. They said: "Don't you see how much grass has grown here?" "Ah," said Lutonia, "you arrant fools!" He went into the house, plucked out the grass, and threw it to the cow. The peasants were greatly amazed at this and began to ask Lutonia to stay with them and enlighten them. "No," said Lutonia, "there are many other such fools in the wide world." And he walked on. 
 In one village he saw a crowd of peasants standing around a house; they had attached a horse collar to the gate and were trying to drive a horse into the collar; they had tired the horse so that it was half dead. "What are you trying to do?" asked Lutonia. "We want to harness this horse, little father," said the peasants. "Ah, you arrant fools," said Lutonia, "let me do it for you." He removed the collar from the gate and put it on the horse. These peasants too were amazed at his feat and entreated him to stay with them for one week at least. But Lutonia refused and walked on. 
 He walked and walked, got tired, and stopped at an inn. The old hostess prepared a hasty pudding, put it on the table, and then over and over again went to the cellar with a spoon to get some milk. "Old woman, why do you wear out your shoes for nothing?" asked Lutonia. "What do you mean, why?" the old woman answered in a hoarse voice. "Don't you see, little father, that the hasty pudding is on the table, and the milk is in the cellar?" "You should bring the pot of milk here, old woman, then you would have a much easier time of it." "That is very true, my good man." She brought the milk to the room and invited Lutonia to sit at her table. Lutonia ate his fill, climbed upon the stove, and fell asleep. When he awakens, my tale will go on; for the time being it is over. 
 

