 ONCE there was a wealthy merchant who traded in rare and precious goods, traveling with his wares every year to foreign lands. One day he fitted out a ship, made ready for his voyage, and said to his wife: "Tell me, my joy, what shall I bring you as a gift from foreign lands?" The merchant's wife answered: "In your house I have all I want and enough of everything! But if you want to gladden my heart, buy me a wondrous wonder, a marvelous marvel." "Very well. If I find one, I shall buy it." 
 The merchant traveled beyond thrice nine lands, to the 
 
 thrice tenth kingdom, sailed into a great and wealthy port, sold all of his cargo, bought a new one, and loaded his ship. Then he walked through the city and thought: "Where shall I find a wondrous wonder, a marvelous marvel?" He met an old man, who asked him: "What are you pondering about, what makes you so sad, my good young man?" "How can I help being sad?" answered the merchant. "I am looking for a wondrous wonder, a marvelous marvel to buy for my wife, but I do not know where to find one." "Eh, you should have told me that in the first place! Come with me. I have a wondrous wonder, a marvelous marvel, and since you must have it, I will sell it to you." 
 The old man led the merchant to his house and said: "Do you see that goose walking in my yard?" "I do." "Now see what's going to happen to it. Hey, goose, come here!" And the goose came into the room. The old man took a roasting pan and again spoke to the goose: "Hey, goose, lie down in the roasting pan." And the goose lay down in the roasting pan. The old man put it in the oven, roasted the goose, took it out, and set it on the table. "Now, merchant," said the old man, "let us sit down and eat. Only do not throw the bones under the table; instead, gather them all into one pile." So they sat at the table and between them ate the whole goose. Then the old man took the picked bones, wrapped them in the tablecloth, threw them on the floor, and said: "Hey, goose! Get up, shake your wings, and go out into the yard!" The goose got up, shook its wings, and went into the yard as though it had never been in the oven! "Indeed, my host, yours is a wondrous wonder, a marvelous marvel," said the merchant, and began to bargain with him for the goose, which he finally bought for a high price. Then he took the goose with him aboard ship and sailed back to his native land. 
 He returned home, greeted his wife, gave her the goose, and told her that with this bird she could have a roast every day without spending a penny-"Just roast it, and it will come to life again!" Next day the merchant went to his stall in the bazaar and in his absence his wife's lover came to see her. She welcomed him with great joy, and offered to prepare a roast 
 
 goose for him. She leaned out of the window and called: "Goose, come here!" And the goose came into the room. "Goose, lie down in the roasting pan!" But the goose refused. The merchant's wife grew angry and struck it with the roasting pan. As she did so, one end of the pan stuck to the goose and the other to her. It stuck so fast that she could not in any way pull herself loose from it. "Oh, sweetheart," cried the merchant's wife, "wrench me loose from this roasting pan! That accursed goose must be bewitched!" The lover grasped the merchant's wife with his two hands to wrench her loose from the roasting pan, but he himself stuck to her. 
 The goose ran out into the yard, then into the street, and dragged them both to the bazaar. The clerks saw their plight and rushed forward to separate them, but whoever touched them stuck to them. A crowd gathered to look at this wonder, and the merchant too came out of his stall. He saw that something was wrong. Who were all these new friends of his wife's? "Confess everything," he said, "otherwise you will stay stuck together like this forever." There was no way out of it, so the merchant's wife confessed her guilt. Then the merchant pulled them apart, soundly thrashed the lover, took his wife home and gave her a good hiding too, repeating with each blow: "Here is your wondrous wonder, your marvelous marvel!" 
