
 IN a certain village there lived two peasants, blood brothers; one was poor and the other rich. The rich one went to live in the town, built himself a big house, and joined the merchants' guild. But the poor one often had not even a piece of bread in his house, and his little children sometimes wept and begged for something to eat. From morning till night this peasant struggled like a fish against ice, but he never could earn anything. One day he said to his wife: "I will go to the town and ask my brother for help." He came to the rich man and said: "Ah, my own brother, help me a little in my misery; my wife and children are without bread, they go hungry for days on end." "Work in my house this week, then I will help you." "What could the poor man do? He set to work, swept the yard, curried the horses, carried water, and chopped wood. At the end of the week the rich brother gave him one loaf of bread. "This is for your work!" he said. "Thank you even for that," said the poor brother; he bowed low before the rich man and was about to go home. "Wait a minute! Come to visit me tomorrow and bring your wife with you. Tomorrow is my 
 
 name day." "Eh, little brother, I don't belong here, you know it well. Your other guests will be merchants in boots and fur coats, and I wear plain linden bark shoes and a wretched gray caftan." "Never mind. Come; there will be a place for you." "Very well then, brother, I will come." 
 The poor man returned home, gave the loaf of bread to his wife, and said: "Listen, wife, we are invited to a feast tomorrow." "To a feast? Who has invited us?" "My brother. Tomorrow is his name day." "Very well, then, we'll go." Next morning they rose and went to the town; they came to their rich brother's house, congratulated him, and sat down on a bench. Many prominent guests were already seated at the table. The host served them all abundantly, but he forgot even to think about his poor brother and sister-in-law, and did not offer them anything; they just sat and watched the others eating and drinking. The dinner was over, the guests began to rise from table, and to thank the host and hostess. The poor man too rose from his bench and bowed to the ground before his brother. The guests went home, drunken and merry; they were noisy and sang songs. 
 The poor man, however, went home with an empty stomach. He said to his wife: "Let us sing a song too." "Eh, you blockhead! The others are singing because they ate savory dishes and drank their fill. What gives you the idea of singing?" "Well, after all, I have been at my brother's feast; I am ashamed to walk without singing. If I sing, everyone will think that I too had a good time." "Well, sing if you must, but I won't." The peasant began singing a song and heard two voices. He stopped and asked his wife: "Was it you who accompanied me in a thin voice?" "What is the matter with you? I wouldn't think of singing a note!" "Then who was it?" "I don't know," said the woman, "but sing again, I will listen." He sang again, and although he alone sang, two voices could be heard. He stopped and said: "Is it you, Misery, who are singing with me?" Misery answered: "Aye, master, I am singing with you." "Well, Misery, let us walk together." "We shall, master. I will never desert you now." 
 The peasant came home, and Misery asked him to go to the 
 
 tavern with him. The peasant answered: "I have no money." "Oh, little peasant! What do you need money for? I see you have a sheepskin, but of what use is it? Summer will be here soon, you will not wear it anyhow. Let us go to the tavern and sell the sheepskin." The peasant and Misery went to the tavern and drank away the sheepskin. On the following day Misery began to moan that his head ached from drinking, and he again called upon his master to drink some wine. "I have no money," said the peasant. "What do we need money for? Take your sledge and cart-those will do." There was nothing to be done, the peasant could not rid himself of Misery; he took his sledge and cart, dragged them to the tavern, and drank them away with his companion. The following morning Misery moaned even more and called upon his master to go drinking again; the peasant drank away his harrow and plow. Before a month had gone by, he had squandered everything; he had even pawned his hut to a neighbor and taken the money to the tavern. But Misery again pressed him: "Come, let us go to the tavern." "No, Misery, do as you like, there is nothing more to sell." "Why, has not your wife two dresses? Leave her one, and the second we will drink away." The peasant took one dress, drank it away, and thought: "Now I am cleaned out! I have neither house nor home, nothing is left to me or my wife!" 
 Next morning Misery awoke, saw that the peasant had nothing left to be taken away, and said: "Master!" "What is it, Misery?" "Listen to me. Go to your neighbor and ask him for his cart and oxen." The peasant went to his neighbor and said: "Give me a cart and a pair of oxen for a short time; I will work a week to pay you for the hire of them." "What do you need them for?" "To go to the woods for some logs." "Very well, take them; but don't overload the cart." "Of course I won't, my benefactor!" He brought the pair of oxen, sat with Misery on the cart, and drove into the open field. "Master," said Misery, "do you know the big stone in this field?" "Of course I know it." "Then go straight to it." They came to the stone, stopped, and climbed down from the cart. Misery ordered the peasant to lift the stone. The peasant lifted it with Misery's help; under it they saw a ditch filled to the brim with gold. 
 
 "Well, why do you stare?" said Misery. "Hurry up and get it into the cart." 
 The peasant set to work and filled the cart with gold. He took everything out of the ditch, down to the last ruble; when he saw that nothing was left, he said: "Have a look, Misery, is there any money left?" Misery leaned over the ditch. "Where?" he said. "I cannot see anything." "But it's shining there in the corner." "No, I don't see it." "Crawl into the ditch, then you will see it." Misery crawled into the ditch; he no sooner had got in than the peasant covered him with the stone. "That way it will be better," said the peasant, "for if I take you with me, miserable Misery, you will drink away all this fortune, even though it will take a long time." The peasant came home, stored the money in his cellar, took the oxen back to his neighbor, and began to consider how to establish himself in society. He bought wood, built himself a large wooden house, and lived twice as richly as his brother. 
 After some time, a long time or a short time, he went to the town to invite his brother and sister-in-law to his name day feast. "What an idea!" his rich brother said to him. "You have nothing to eat, yet you are celebrating your name day." "True, at one time I had nothing to eat, but now, thank God, I am no worse off then you. Come and you will see." "Very well then, I will come." The next day the rich brother and his wife came to the name day feast; and lo and behold, the once wretched man had a large wooden house, new and lofty, such as not every merchant has! The peasant gave them a royal feast, fed them with all kinds of viands, and set various meads and wines before them. The rich brother asked him: "Tell me, please, how did you become so wealthy?" The peasant told him truthfully how miserable Misery had attached himself to him, how he had led him to drink away all his possessions, down to the last thread, till nothing was left but the soul in his body, how Misery had shown him the treasure in the open field, how he had then taken the treasure and got rid of Misery. 
 The rich man was envious. He thought to himself: "I will go to the open field, lift the stone, and let Misery out-let him ruin my brother completely, so that he will not dare to boast of 
 
 his riches to me." He sent his wife home, and rushed to the field; he drove to the big stone, turned it to one side, and stooped to see what was beneath it. Before he could bend his head all the way down, Misery jumped out and sat on his neck. "Ah," he shrieked, "you wanted to starve me to death in there, but I'll never leave you now." "Listen, Misery," said the merchant, "in truth it was not I who imprisoned you beneath that stone." "Who then did it, if not you?" "It was my brother who imprisoned you, and I came for the express purpose of freeing you." "No, you are lying! You cheated me once, but you won't cheat me again!" Misery sat securely on the rich man's neck; the rich man carried him home, and his fortune began to dwindle away. From early morning Misery applied himself to his task; every day he called upon the merchant to drink, and much of his wealth went to the tavern keeper. "This is no way to live," thought the merchant. "It seems to me that I have sufficiently amused Misery. It is high time I separated from him -but how?" 
 He thought and thought and finally had an idea. He went out into his broad courtyard, cleft two oaken spikes, took a new wheel, and drove a spike into the hollow shaft that went through the hub of the wheel. He came to Misery. "Why, Misery, do you always lie on your side?" "What else shall I do?" "What else? Come into the courtyard and play hide-and-seek with me." Misery was delighted with this idea. They went into the yard. First the merchant hid; Misery found him at once, and now it was Misery's turn to hide. "Well," he said, "you won't find me so soon. I can get into any hole, no matter how small!" "You're bragging," said the merchant. "You can't even get into that wheel, let alone a hole." "I can't get into that wheel? Just wait and see how I shall hide." Misery crawled into the hollow shaft; the merchant drove another oaken spike into the other end of the hollow shaft, picked up the wheel, and cast it together with Misery into the river. Misery drowned, and the merchant lived again as of old. 
