
 Once there was a blacksmith. "How is it," he said, "that I have never seen trouble? It is said that there is evil in the world; I will go and search for it." No sooner said than done; he drank heartily and went forth in search of evil. He met a tailor. "Good day," the blacksmith said. "Good day. Where are you going?" "Well, brother, everyone says that there is evil in the world; I have never seen it, so I am searching for it." "Let us go together. I too live well and have never seen evil; let us go and look for it." They walked and walked, till they came to a forest, deep and dark; they found a little path and walked along it. They walked and walked along this narrow path, and finally they beheld a big hut. It was night, they had no shelter. "Let us go into this house," they said. They entered; no one was there, it was empty and uncomfortable. 
 
 They sat down and waited. In came a tall woman, scrawny, crooked, one-eyed. "Aha," she said, "I have guests. Good evening!" "Good evening, grandmother! We have come to spend the night in your house." "That is fine; I will get something for supper." They took fright. She went out and brought in a huge load of wood; she put it in the stove and made a fire. She came to them, took one of them, the tailor, slew him, and put him to roast in the oven. 
 The blacksmith sat there and wondered what he could do. She ate her supper. The blacksmith looked into the stove and said: "Grandmother, I am a blacksmith." "What can you forge?" "I can forge everything." "Then forge me an eye." "I will," he said. "But do you have a piece of rope? For I must tie you, otherwise you will resist." She brought two ropes, one thick and the other thin. He tied her with the thin rope. "Now, grandmother, turn around." She turned around and broke the rope. "No," he said, "this piece is no good." He took the thick rope and fastened her tightly with it. "Turn around, grandmother!" She turned and this time did not break the rope. He took an awl, heated it, put it on her good eye, took an ax, and drove in the awl with the butt of it. She gave a turn, broke the rope, and sat on the threshold. "Ah, you scoundrel, now you won't get away from me!" 
 He saw that things looked bad for him and sat wondering what he could do. Later sheep came from the field; the woman drove them into her house to spend the night. The blacksmith also slept there. In the morning she began to let out the sheep. He took a sheepskin, turned the wool side out, put his arms through the sleeves, and crawled toward her like a sheep. She let out the sheep one by one, seizing them roughly by their rumps and throwing them out. Now the blacksmith came up to her; she seized him too by his rump and threw him out. When he was outside, he got up and said: "Farewell, Evil! I have suffered evil from you, but now you cannot do anything to me." She said: "Wait, you will still suffer; you have not got away yet." 
 The blacksmith again followed the narrow path in the forest. He saw an ax with a golden handle stuck into a tree and wanted 
 
 to take it. When he seized this ax, his hand stuck to it What could he do? There was no way of wresting his hand free. He looked back; Evil was coming up to him, crying: "There you are, you scoundrel, you have not got away!" The blacksmith took out a knife that he had in his pocket and began to saw his wrist; he cut off his hand and went away. He came back to his village and showed his stump to everybody as proof that he had seen evil. "See what it is like," he said. "It has left me without a hand and it ate up my companion altogether." And that is the end of my tale. 
 
 
