 The night before St. John's a pike was born in the Sheksna River, a pike with teeth so long that God preserve us from any such! Shad, perch, flounder-all assembled to stare and marvel at this wonder. At the time of the birth, the water in the Sheksna became agitated, a ferryboat sailing across it almost sank, and some lovely maidens who were taking a walk on the riverbank scattered. Such a long-toothed pike was he! And he began to grow not by the day, but by the hour; with every day that passed, an inch was added to his size. And the pike with the long teeth began to roam about the Sheksna catching shad and perch. He would sight a shad from afar, snatch him with his teeth, and the shad was as good as gone; only his bones crackled between the pike's long teeth. Such was the marvelous happening in the Sheksna. Now what could the shad and perch do? They were very sad: if things went on like this, the pike would eat them all, wipe them out. So all the small fry gathered together and debated about how to get rid of that ravenous pike with the long teeth. To the meeting also came Perch Perchson, who held forth in a loud voice: "Stop pondering, racking your wits, and cudgeling your brains. Listen to what I have to say. All of us in the Sheksna are now sorely tried. The pike with the long teeth gives us no rest: he gobbles up all kinds of fish. There's no life for us any more in the Sheksna! Let us move to smaller rivers, to the Sizma, the Konoma, and the Slavenka. There no one will bother us, and we'll live happily and beget children." So all the shad, flounder, and perch left the Sheksna for the smaller rivers, for the Sizma, the Konoma, and the Slavenka. On the way, as they swam, a cunning fisherman caught many of them on his line. He cooked a savory fish soup, and, it appears, ate it on a fast day. From that time on, almost no small fry has been found in the Sheksna. A fisherman can cast his 
 
 line into the water and pull out nothing; once in a while he gets a little sterlet-nothing else. And that is the whole story of the ravenous pike with the long teeth. That rascal caused a lot of trouble in the Sheksna, but later he came to a bad end himself. When there was no small fry left, he went after worms and got caught on a hook. The fisherman made a fish soup out of him, ate it, and praised it highly, for the flesh of the pike was quite succulent. I was there and ate the soup with him; it ran down my mustache but never got into my mouth. 
