
 IN one village there lived two brothers, Danilo and Gavrilo. Danilo was rich and Gavrilo poor. One cow was Gavrilo's only possession, and Danilo envied him even that. One day Danilo went to town to buy something, and upon his return came to his brother and told him: "Brother, why do you keep a cow? I was in town today and saw that cows can be had very cheap, at five or six rubles a head, but hides are selling at twenty rubles." Gavrilo believed him, slaughtered his cow, ate the meat, and at market time went to town to sell his cowhide. A tanner saw him and asked: "Is that hide for sale, my good man?" "It is." "How much do you want for it?" "Twenty-five rubles." "Are you out of your mind? I'll give you two rubles and a half." Gavrilo refused to sell the hide at this price and dragged it around with him all day, but no one offered him any more. Finally, he dragged the hide to the bazaar. A merchant saw him and asked: "Is that hide for sale?" "It is." "What is your price?" "Twenty-five rubles." "Are you mad? Who ever heard of such an expensive hide? I'll give you two and a half." Gavrilo thought and thought, and finally said: "So be it, Mr. Merchant, I will accept your price. But give me at least a glass of vodka." "Very well, we won't quarrel about a drink." The merchant gave him two rubles and a half, drew a handkerchief out of his pocket, and said: "Now go to that stone house over there, give the hostess this handkerchief, and tell her from me to give you a full glass of wine." 
 Gavrilo took the handkerchief, went to the house, and the hostess asked him: "What do you want?" Gavrilo said: "Thus and so, Madam! I sold your husband a hide for two rubles and a half, and a full glass of wine in addition; he sent me here to give you this handkerchief and ask you to serve me the wine." The hostess immediately poured a glass, but not quite a full one, and offered it to Gavrilo; he drank it and stood there. The hostess asked him: "Why are you still standing there?" Gavrilo answered: "Our agreement was for a full glass of 
 
 wine." At that time the merchant's wife had her lover in the house; he heard Gavrilo's words and said: "Pour him some more, sweetheart!" She poured him half a glass; Gavrilo drank it and still stood there. Again the hostess asked him: "What are you waiting for now?" Gavrilo answered: "Our agreement was for a full glass, and you gave me half a glass." The lover told her to serve him for the third time; then the merchant's wife took the wine decanter, put the glass in Gavrilo's hand, and poured so much wine that it overflowed the rim. Gavrilo had no sooner drunk his wine than the merchant knocked at the door. The wife did not know where to hide her lover and began to cry: "Where shall I put you?" The lover ran back and forth in the room, and Gavrilo after him, crying: "And where shall I go?" The woman opened the trapdoor and pushed them both in. 
 The merchant came in, bringing guests with him. When they had drunk some liquor they began to sing songs, and Gavrilo, sitting in the pit, said to his companion: "Do what you will, but this is my father's favorite song, and I shall sing it too." "For heaven's sake, please, don't sing! Here are a hundred rubles for you, only keep quiet." Gavrilo took the money and kept quiet. After a short time the merry band above them began another song. Gavrilo again said to his companion: "Do what you will, but this time I must join them: that is my mother's favorite song!" "Please, don't sing! Here are two hundred rubles for you." This suited Gavrilo: he now had three hundred rubles; he put the money in his pocket and kept quiet. Soon the guests began a third song. Gavrilo said: "This time give me four hundred rubles, else I'll sing." The lover begged him not to, and said that he had no more money. The merchant's wife heard them wrangling in the cellar, opened the trapdoor, and whispered: "What is the matter?" Her lover asked her for five hundred rubles; she quickly returned with the money, and Gavrilo took it and kept quiet. 
 After a while he noticed a pillow and a barrel of tar in the pit; he ordered his companion to undress. After the lover had undressed, Gavrilo smeared him with tar, then cut open the pillow, and ordered him to roll in the feathers. After the man 
 
 had rolled himself in the feathers, Gavrilo opened the trapdoor, sat himself astride his companion, and rode out, crying: "The ninth devil is leaving this house!" The guests became frightened and rushed home, thinking that devils had come. After all of them were gone, the merchant's wife said to her husband: "I told you that strange things were going on here." The merchant foolishly believed her and sold his house for a song. 
 Gavrilo came home and sent his eldest son to ask Danilo to come to him and help him count his money. But Danilo laughed in his nephew's face. "What is there to count?" he said. "Can't your father count two and a half rubles?" "Oh no, uncle, father has brought home lots of money!" Then Danilo's wife said: "Go there, at least to make fun of him." Danilo heeded his wife and went to his brother's. When Gavrilo poured out the pile of money before him, Danilo was surprised and asked: "Brother, where did you get so much money?" "What do you mean, where? I slaughtered my cow, and sold its hide in town for twenty-five rubles; for this money I bought five cows, slaughtered them, and sold their hides at the same price; and so on." Upon hearing that his brother had made a fortune so easily, Danilo went home, slaughtered all his cattle, and began to wait for market day; and since it was summer, the flesh of the slaughtered animals rotted. When he brought his hides to town, no one wanted to give him more than two and a half rubles for each. He was forced to sell them at a loss, and began to live more miserably than Gavrilo had ever lived. But Gavrilo became a sharp merchant and amassed a large fortune. 
 
 
 
