
 ONCE there was a peasant who liked to pick a fight; he invited another peasant to his house, told his wife to set the table, and asked his guest to sit down. The guest said politely: "You shouldn't have gone to so much trouble, Demyan Ilyich." Demyan Ilyich slapped him in the face and said: "Always obey the master when you're in someone else's house." The guest sat down, the host offered him food, and he ate. The host began to cut numberless slices of bread. The guest said: "Why do you cut so much bread, Demyan Ilyich?" Demyan Ilyich gave him another slap in the face, saying: "Don't give advice in someone else's house. Do what the host tells you." The guest became unhappy, and when offered food did not eat it, thus disobeying Demyan, who kept beating him and saying: "In someone else's house, obey the master!" 
 At that moment another fellow, shabbily dressed, but lively and robust, opened the gate, and without being invited, rode into the yard. Demyan went out on the porch and saluted him: "Welcome, welcome!" For he wanted to thrash this guest, too! The fellow was not backward. He removed his hat and said: "Forgive me, Demyan Ilyich, for having come without first asking permission." "Never mind, you are welcome, please come in!" The fellow came in. The host bade him sit down at table and ordered his wife to serve the dishes and bring bread. The fellow ate and ate, without contradicting his host. No matter how Demyan tried to provoke this guest, he could not find a pretext for striking him. Finally he resorted to tricks; he brought out his very best clothes and said to the stranger: "Take off what you are wearing, put this on." He thought to himself: "He will refuse out of politeness, and then I will thrash him." But the fellow did not refuse; he put on the clothes that his host gave him. Demyan offered him this and that; still the fellow did not quarrel. Demyan brought out a good horse, saddled it with his best saddle, put a good bridle on it, and said to his guest, "Take my horse, yours is a poor 
 
 jade"-thinking to himself that the man would surely refuse. But the fellow mounted the horse. Demyan told him to ride forth; he silently urged on the horse, went out of the yard, and said: "Farewell, Demyan! The devil didn't send me, I came here of my own accord." And he was never heard of again. Demyan followed him with his eyes, clapped his hands, and said: "Well, at last I've found my equal! Not he, hut I was fooled-I wanted to thrash him, and instead I lost my horse." And his horse with its trappings was worth perhaps as much as a hundred and fifty rubles. 
 
