
 ONCE there lived a priest and his wife; they had a daughter named Alionushka. One day the priest was called to a wedding; he made ready to go with his wife and left his daughter at home. "Mother, I am afraid to stay alone," said Alionushka to her mother. "Invite your friends to sit with you, then you won't he alone," said her mother. The priest and his wife left and Alionushka gathered her friends together; many came with their work-some knitted, some made lace, some brought spinning. One maiden inadvertently dropped a spindle; it rolled away and fell through a crack straight into the cellar. She went to the cellar to get her spindle, and saw a robber sitting behind a tub and threatening her with one finger. "Mind you," he said, "don't tell anyone that I am here, or you won't live much longer." She climbed out of the cellar, pale as ashes, told everything in a whisper to one friend. That friend told it to another, and this last to still another; all of them were frightened and began to make ready to go home. "Where are you going?" Alionushka asked them. "Wait, it is still early." Some said that they had to fetch water, some that they wanted to bring cloth to a neighbor, and all of them left. Alionushka remained alone. 
 The robber realized that everything had become quiet, came 
 
 out of the cellar, and said: "Good evening, lovely maiden, queen of cake bakers!" "Good evening," said Alionushka. The robber examined everything in the house and then went to look over the yard, and Alionushka quickly closed the door and put out the light. The robber knocked at the door. "Let me in," he called, "or I will slay you." "I won't let you in! If you wish to get in, climb through the window," she said, and armed herself with an ax. As soon as the robber put his head through the window she swung her ax and cut off his head. Then she began to wonder: soon the other robbers would come, his companions-what should she do then? She took the severed head and tied it in a bag; then she dragged in the slain robber, cut him in pieces, and put the pieces into various bags and pots. 
 After some time, the other robbers came and asked: "Have you done it?" They thought that their companion was alive. "I have," answered Alionushka in the robber's voice. "Here are two bagfuls of money, and here is a crock of butter, and here is a ham." And she handed to them, through the window, the bags and pots she had prepared. The robbers took them all and loaded them onto their cart. "Now let us go," they said. "Go ahead," said Alionushka. "I want to see whether there is anything else left." They went. 
 Daybreak came. The priest and his wife returned from the wedding. She told them everything that had happened. "So I myself overcame the robbers," she said. Meanwhile the robbers reached home, and when they opened the bags and pots they gasped. "Ah, what a woman!" they said. "Very well then, we shall destroy her." They dressed themselves in fine garments and came to the priest to woo Alionushka; they had chosen a little fool for her groom and had dressed him up too. Alionushka recognized them by their voices and said to her father: "Father, these are not matchmakers, these are the same robbers who were here before." "Why do you lie?" said the priest. "Look how well dressed they are!" He was glad that such fine people had come to woo his daughter and that they did not ask for a dowry. Alionushka wept, but to no avail. "We will drive you out of our home if you refuse to be married," said the priest and his wife. They gave her in marriage to the robber 
 
 groom and celebrated the wedding. It was a most luxurious feast. 
 The robbers set out for their house with Alionushka and as soon as they entered the forest, they said: "Well, shall we put her to death right here?" But the little fool said: "Let her live for at least a day, so that I may look at her." "What do you want to look at her for, you fool?" "Please, brothers!" The robbers consented, drove on, and took Alionushka to their house. They drank and drank, reveled and reveled, and then said: "Well, now it is time to put her to death." But the fool said: "Let me spend at least one night with her." "No, fool, she might run away." "Please, brothers!" The robbers yielded to his entreaty and left them in a separate room. 
 Alionushka said to her husband: "Let me out into the yard, I want to get a breath of fresh air." "But what if my companions hear you?" "I'll be quiet; let me out by the window." "I would be glad to let you, but suppose you run away?" "Then tie me. I have a good piece of linen that my mother gave me; tie the linen around me and drop me down, and when you pull I will climb back to the window." The fool tied her with the linen. When he dropped her, she quickly untied herself and tied a she-goat to the linen in place of herself. After a while she said: "Pull me back!" And she ran away. 
 The fool pulled, and the goat said: "Maa-ka-ka!" Each time he pulled, the goat said: "Maa-ka-ka!" "Why do you bleat?" said the bridegroom. "My friends will hear you and destroy you at once." When he pulled the linen in, he was surprised to see a goat attached to it. The fool was frightened and did not know what to do. "Ah, the accursed woman, she has deceived me!" he said. Next morning the robbers came into his room. "Where is your bride?" they asked him. "She ran away." "Ah, you fool, you fool! We told you so in the first place." 
 They mounted their horses and galloped after Alionushka; they rode with hounds, cracked their whips, and whistled-it was dreadful to hear them! Alionushka heard her pursuers and climbed into the hollow trunk of a dry oak; she sat there half dead and half alive, while the hounds circled and circled around the oak. "Isn't she there?" one robber said to another. 
 
 "Thrust your knife in!" He thrust his knife into the tree hole and struck Alionushka's knee. But she was a clever girl; she seized a handkerchief and wiped off the knife. The robber looked at his knife and said: "No, there is nothing there." Again they galloped in various directions, whistling and cracking their whips. 
 When everything grew quiet, Alionushka climbed out of the tree trunk and ran; she ran and ran and heard her pursuers once more. On the road she saw a peasant driving, with troughs and wooden trays on his cart. "Little uncle, hide me under a trough!" she besought him. "Eh, but you're so well dressed! You'll get all dirty." "Please, hide me! Robbers are pursuing me." The peasant untied his troughs, put her under the lowest, and tied them together again. He had hardly finished when the robbers arrived. "Peasant, have you not seen such and such a woman?" "I have not, my friends." "You lie! Throw down your troughs!" He began to throw down the troughs and now only one was left, the last. "It's no use to look for her here, brothers. Let us ride on farther," said the robbers, and galloped away yelling, whistling, and cracking their whips. 
 When everything grew quiet, Alionushka said: "Little uncle, let me out." The peasant let her out and she ran on again; she ran and ran and again heard her pursuers. On the road she beheld a peasant driving a cart loaded with skins. "Little uncle," she implored him, "hide me under your skins. Robbers are pursuing me." "Eh, but you're so well dressed! Under the skins you'll get all dirty." "Never mind, only hide me!" The peasant untied his skins, put her under the lowest, and tied them up as before. He had hardly finished when the robbers arrived. "Peasant, have you not seen such and such a woman?" "I have not, my friends." "You lie! Throw down your skins." "Why, my friends, should I throw down my possessions?" The robbers fell to throwing down the skins themselves and threw down almost all of them; only two or three were left. "It's no use looking for her here, brothers; let us ride on farther," they said, and galloped away yelling, whistling, and cracking their whips. 
 When all this tumult and thunder had died away, she said: 
 
 "Little uncle, let me go." The peasant let her go and she ran again; she ran and ran, came home at midnight, lay in a haystack, buried herself in it completely, and fell asleep. At daybreak, the priest went to give hay to the cows, and the moment he thrust his fork into the stack, Alionushka seized it with her hands. The priest took fright, crossed himself, and said: "Good Heavens! Lord have pity on us!" Then he asked: "Who is there?" Alionushka recognized her father and crawled out of the hay. "How did you get in there?" "In such and such a manner. You married me among robbers; they wanted to kill me, but I ran away." And she told him all her adventures. After a while the robbers came to the priest, who had hidden Alionushka. He asked: "Is my daughter safe and sound?" "Thank God, she stayed at home to look after the house," said the robbers, and they seated themselves as though they were guests. Meanwhile the priest had gathered troops. He led out his daughter and said: "And who is this?" The robbers were seized, tied, and thrown into prison. 

