
 There was once a widowed king who had twelve daughters, one more beautiful than the other. Every night these princesses went away, no one knew whither; and every night each of them wore out a new pair of shoes. The king could not get shoes for them fast enough and he wanted to know where they went every night and what they did there. So he prepared a feast, summoned kings and princes, noblemen, merchants, and simple people from all lands, and said: "Can anyone solve this riddle? He who solves it will receive his favorite princess in marriage and half the kingdom as a dowry." However, no one would undertake to find out where the princesses went at night, except one needy nobleman, who said: "Your Royal Majesty, I will find out." "Very well, find out." 
 Soon the needy nobleman began to doubt and thought to himself: "What have I done? I have undertaken to solve this riddle, yet I do not know how. If I fail now, the king will put me in prison." He went out of the palace and walked outside the town with a sad face. He met an old woman who asked him: "Why are you so sad, my good man?" He answered: "Grandmother, how can I help being sad? I have undertaken to find out for the king whither his daughters go every night." "Yes, that is a difficult task. But it can be accomplished. Here is an invisible cap; with its help you can find out many things. But mind you: when you go to bed, the princesses will give you a sleeping potion; however, turn your face to the wall, pour the drops into your bed, and do not drink them!" The nobleman thanked the old woman and returned to the palace. 
 At nightfall he was assigned a room next to the princesses' bedroom. He lay on his bed and made ready to watch. Then one of the princesses brought him sleeping drops in wine and asked him to drink to her health. He could not refuse, took the cup, turned to the wall, and poured it into his bed. On the stroke of midnight the princesses came to see whether he was 
 
 asleep. The nobleman pretended to be sleeping so soundly that nothing could rouse him, but actually he was listening to every rustle. "Well, little sisters," said one of them, "our guard has fallen asleep; it is time for us to go to the ball." "It is time, high time!" 
 They dressed in their best garments; the oldest sister pushed her bed to one side and disclosed a passage to the underground kingdom, to the realm of the accursed king. They began to climb down a ladder. The nobleman quietly rose from his bed, donned his invisible cap, and followed them. Accidentally he stepped on the youngest princess' dress. She was frightened and said to her sisters: "Ah, little sisters, someone seems to have stepped on my dress; this is a bad omen." "Don't worry, nothing will happen to us." They went down the ladder and came to a grove where golden flowers grew. The nobleman picked one flower and broke off a twig, and the whole grove rumbled. "Ah, little sisters," said the youngest princess, "do you hear how the grove is rumbling? This bodes no good." "Fear not, it is the music in the accursed king's palace." 
 They came to the palace and were met by the king and his courtiers. The music began to play and they began to dance; they danced till their shoes were torn to shreds. The king ordered wine to be served to the guests. The nobleman took a goblet from the tray, drank the wine, and put the goblet in his pocket. At last the party was over; the princesses said farewell to their cavaliers, promised to come the next night, returned home, undressed, and went to sleep. 
 The next morning the king summoned the needy nobleman. "Well," he said, "have you discovered what my daughters do every night?" "I have." "Then where do they go?" "To the underground kingdom, to the accursed king, and there they dance all night." The king summoned his daughters and began to question them: "Where were you last night?" The princesses denied everything. "We did not go anywhere," they said. "Have you not been with the accursed king? This nobleman testifies against you and is ready to offer proof." "Father, he cannot offer proof, for he slept like the dead all night." The needy nobleman drew the golden flower and the goblet from his 
 
 pocket. "Here," he said, "is the proof." The princesses had no choice but to confess everything to their father; he ordered the passage to the underground kingdom to be walled up, married the needy nobleman to his youngest daughter, and all of them lived happily ever afterward. 
 
 

