
 IN A certain kingdom, in a certain land, there lived a peasant who had a son. The peasant's name was Alexei and the son's Vanka. When summer came Alexei plowed his land and planted turnips; and the turnips throve so well and grew so big and succulent that it was a marvel to behold them. The peasant was glad; he went to his field every morning, rejoiced in his turnips, and gave thanks to God. One day he noticed that someone was stealing his turnips and began to watch the field; he watched and watched, but saw no one. Then he sent Vanka to the field, saying: "Go watch the turnips." 
 Vanka came to the field and saw a boy digging up the turnips and filling two enormous bags with them; he slung them over his back and began to drag them along with great difficulty- his legs bent under him, his back creaked! The boy dragged and dragged the bags till his strength failed him; then he threw the bags on the ground and suddenly saw Vanka standing before him. "Do me a favor, my good man," said the boy. "Help me carry these bags home; grandfather will reward you for it." When Vanka saw the boy, he stood as if petrified, staring at him with wide eyes. Then he came to and said: "All right, I'll help you!" He slung the two bags of turnips over his shoulders and carried them after the boy, who skipped ahead, saying: "Grandfather sends me for turnips every day. If you bring them to him, he will give you much silver and gold. But don't take it. Ask for the self-playing gusla instead." 
 After a while they came to the boy's house; in the corner there sat a gray-haired man with horns. Vanka bowed to him. The old man gave him a lump of gold for his trouble; Vanka's eyes began to gleam, but the boy whispered to him: "Don't take it." Vanka said: "I don't want gold. Give me the self-playing gusla, and all the turnips will be yours." When he mentioned the self-playing gusla, the old man's eyes popped out an inch, his mouth opened to his ears, and the horns on his forehead began to jump. Vanka was seized by fear, but the 
 
 boy said: "Give it to him, grandfather." "You want a great deal! But so be it: take the gusla, and in return give me whatever is dearest to you in your own home." Vanka thought to himself: "Our little house barely sticks out of the ground; surely there is nothing precious in it." But aloud he said: "I agree." And he took the self-playing gusla and went home. When he arrived he found his father dead on the threshold. He wept and mourned for him, buried him, and went forth to seek his fortune. 
 He came to a large city, the capital of a great king. In front of the king's palace was a meadow in which pigs were grazing. Vanka went to the swineherd, bought some pigs from him, and began to tend them. Whenever he strummed the self-playing gusla, his whole herd began to dance. One day when the king was away, his daughter sat by the window and saw Vanka sitting on a tree stump and strumming his gusla while his pigs danced before him. The princess sent her maid to ask this swineherd to sell her at least one of the dancing pigs. Vanka said: "Let her come herself!" The princess came and said: "Swineherd, sell me one of your pigs." "My pigs are not for sale, they are sacred." "And what is their sacred price?" "Well, princess, if you wish to have one of my pigs, show me your white body up to your knees." The princess thought and thought, looked all around her to make sure that no one was looking, and raised her dress up to her knees, revealing a little birthmark on her right leg. Vanka gave her a pig; the princess ordered it to be led to her palace, called the musicians, and made them play. She wanted to see how the pig would dance to their music, but it only hid in the corners, howling and grunting. 
 The king returned and decided to give his daughter in marriage. He summoned all the boyars and lords and merchants and peasants; kings and princes and people of all kinds came from foreign lands and gathered in his palace. The king said: "He who guesses what mark there is on my daughter, to him I shall give her in marriage." None of them could guess; and no matter how they tried, they could not find out where the mark was. Finally Vanka stepped forth and said that the princess had a little birthmark on her right leg. "You have guessed right," said the king. He married Vanka to his daughter and gave a great feast for all the people. Vanka was now the king's son-in-law and began to live a carefree life. 

