
 IN A CERTAIN KINGDOM, in a certain land, there lived a merchant who had three daughters. He built himself a new house and sent his eldest daughter to spend the night there. In the morning he asked her what she had seen in her dream. She had dreamed that she would marry a merchant's son. On the second night the merchant sent his second daughter, and she dreamed that she would marry a nobleman. The third night it was the youngest daughter's turn, and she-poor little thing-dreamed that she would marry a goat. 
 Her father was frightened and forbade his youngest daughter to go out even on the porch. But one day she disobeyed and did go out, and a goat seized her on his tall horns and carried her away beyond the steep mountains. He brought her to his house and put her to sleep on the shelf above the stove; snot ran down his nose, slobber ran down from his mouth, and the unfortunate girl never stopped wiping him with a handkerchief, for she was not a bit squeamish. The goat was pleased- he combed his beard in his pleasure. 
 Next morning our beauty arose and saw that the yard was inclosed with a picket fence, and that there was a maiden's head on every picket; only one picket was empty. The poor girl rejoiced at having escaped death. Then the servants began to hurry her, saying: "Madam, this is no time to sleep-this is the time to bestir yourself, sweep the rooms, and carry the garbage out into the street." 
 She went to the porch and saw geese flying. "Ah, geese, my gray geese, do you not come from my land, do you not bring me news of my own little father?" And the geese answered her: "We do come from your land, and we have brought you news: there is a betrothal in your house, your elder sister is being married to a merchant's son." The goat on his shelf heard everything and said to his servants: "Hey you, my faithful servants, bring out the splendid garments, harness the black steeds; let them jump thrice and go where I desire to be." 
 
 The poor girl dressed herself richly and got into the carriage; the steeds brought her to her father's house in a trice. The guests were being welcomed on the porch and in the house a magnificent feast was set out. Meanwhile the goat turned into a handsome youth and walked into the yard playing his gusla. One could hardly avoid inviting a gusla player to sit down at one's table. He came in and began to sing: "Wife of the goat, wife of the snot-nose! Wife of the goat, wife of the snot-nose!" The unhappy girl slapped him on one cheek, slapped him on the other, jumped into her carriage, and was gone. 
 She returned home and found the goat lying on the shelf. Snot ran down his nose, slobber ran down from his mouth. The poor girl wiped him with a handkerchief without ceasing; she was not a bit squeamish. Next morning the servants roused her: "Madam, this is no time to sleep-this is the time to rise, sweep the rooms, and carry the garbage out into the street." She rose, set the rooms in order, and went to the porch; and she saw geese flying. "Ah, geese, my gray geese, do you not come from my land, do you not bring me news of my own little father?" And the geese answered her: "We do come from your land, and we have brought you news: there is a betrothal in your house, your second sister is being married to a wealthy nobleman." Again the poor girl drove to her father's house; on the porch the guests were being welcomed, in the house a magnificent feast was set out. Meanwhile the goat turned into a handsome youth and walked into the yard playing his gusla. He came in and began to sing: "Wife of the goat, wife of the snot-nose! Wife of the goat, wife of the snot-nose!" The unhappy girl slapped him on one cheek, slapped him on the other, jumped into her carriage, and was gone. 
 She returned home and found the goat lying on the shelf. Snot ran down his nose, slobber ran down from his mouth. Another night passed; in the morning the poor girl rose and went to the porch; again geese were flying. "Ah, geese, my gray geese, do you not come from my land, do you not bring me news of my own little father?" And the geese answered her: "We do come from your land, and we have brought you news: your 
 
 father is giving a dinner." She drove to her father's house; the guests were heing welcomed on the porch and in the house a magnificent feast was set out. In the yard the gusla player was walking about and strumming on his gusla. He was asked to come in and again began to sing: "Wife of the goat, wife of the snot-nose!" 
 The poor girl slapped him on one cheek, slapped him on the other, and drove home in a trice. She looked on the shelf and found only a goatskin: the gusla player had not yet had time to turn into a goat. She flung the goatskin into the stove-and the merchant's youngest daughter found herself married not to a goat but to a handsome youth, and they began to live happily and prosperously. 
 
