
 ONCE there were an old man and his wife who had a granddaughter, Snow White. Her little friends wanted to go to the woods for berries and asked her to join them. For a long time the old couple would not consent, but after many entreaties they let her go, telling her on no account to separate from her friends. But walking in the woods and picking berries, shrub after shrub, bush after bush, Snow White did become separated from her friends. They hallooed and hallooed her but Snow White did not hear them. Night fell and her friends went home. 
 Seeing that she was all alone, Snow White climbed up into a tree and began to weep bitterly, saying to herself: "Ai, ai, Snow White, little dove, grandfather and grandmother had a little granddaughter, Snow White; some girls lured her to the woods, and having lured her there, abandoned her." A bear came by and asked: "Why are you weeping, Snow White?" "How can I help weeping, little father bear? I am grandfather's and grandmother's only granddaughter, Snow White; some girls lured me to the woods, and having lured me there, abandoned me." "Come down, I will carry you home." "No, I am afraid of you, you will devour me." 
 The bear left her. Again she began to cry, saying: "Ai, ai, Snow White, ai, ai, little dove!" A wolf came by and asked: "Why are you weeping, Snow White?" She answered him as she had answered the bear. "Come down, I will carry you home." "No, I am afraid of you, you will devour me." 
 The wolf left her and Snow White wept again, saying: "Ai, ai, Snow White, ai, ai, little dove!" A fox came by and asked: "Why are you weeping, Snow White?" "How can I help weeping, little fox? Some girls lured me to the woods, and having lured me, abandoned me." "Come down, I will carry you home." 
 Snow White came down, sat on the fox's back, and the fox 
 
 darted off with her; she ran up to the house and with her tail began to knock at the gate. "Who is there?" they called from within. The fox answered that she had brought home to the old man and old woman their granddaughter, Snow White. "Ah, our beloved, come in, come in, where shall we seat you and what shall we offer you?" They brought out milk, eggs, and cheese curds, and began to feast the fox for her kindness. But the fox asked that a chicken be brought out into the field as a reward. The old couple said farewell to the fox, put a chicken in one bag and a dog in another, and took the bags to the place named by the fox. There they let the chicken out: the fox had no sooner jumped upon it than they let out the dog. Seeing the dog, the fox rushed into the woods and never came back. 

