Two soldiers on a trip stopped to rest in an old woman's house. They asked for some food and drink, but the old woman said: "What shall I offer you? I have nothing, my boys." Yet in her oven she had a boiled cock in a pot under the roasting pan. The soldiers guessed this; one of them-who was a roguish fellow-went out into the yard, upset a cart full of sheaves of grain, returned to the house, and said: "Little grandmother, go out, the cattle are eating your grain." The old woman went out and the soldiers peered into the oven, took the cock out of the pot, put an old shoe in the pot instead, and hid the cock in their bag. The old woman came back and said: "My dear boys, didn't you set the cattle loose? Why do you cause mischief like that? Don't do that again, please." The soldiers sat in silence awhile, then asked again: "Please, little grandmother, give us something to eat." "Take some kvass and bread, my boys; that will do." 
 Then the old woman wanted to crow because she had cheated them and proposed a riddle to them: "Well, my boys, you've traveled a lot, you've seen the world. Now tell me-is Mr. Cock Cockson still living in Ovenia, at Potburg near Pantown?" "No, little grandmother." "Who, then, is living there?" "Mr. Shoe Shoeson." "And what has happened to Mr. Cock Cock-son?" "He moved to Bagville, little grandmother." After that the soldiers left. The old woman's son returned from the field and asked her for some food. She said: "Imagine, my son, some soldiers came by here and asked me for something to eat. But 
 
 instead of giving it to them I posed them a riddle about the cock that I have in the oven, and they couldn't solve it." "And what riddle did you pose them, mother?" "This one-'Is Mr. Cock Cockson still living in Ovenia, at Potburg near Pantown?' They did not solve it. They said: 'No, little grandmother.' 'But where is he?' I asked them. 'He has moved to Bagville,' they said. They never guessed, the sons of bitches, what I had in my pot." She looked into the oven, but the cock had flown away; she dragged out only an old shoe. "Ah, my little son, those accursed fellows robbed me after all." "You should have known better, mother; a soldier knows the world, he cannot be cheated!" 
