
 IN A certain kingdom there lived a king whose daughter was a sorceress. At the king's court there was a priest, and the priest had a ten-year-old son who every day went to a certain old woman to learn how to read. One day the boy happened to return from his lesson late at night; as he went by the king's palace he looked in at a window. At that window sat the princess, making her toilet. She took off her head, soaped it, rinsed it in clear water, combed her hair with a comb, plaited a tress, and then put her head back in its place. The boy marveled- "How cunning she is, a real magician!" He returned home and told everyone that he had seen the princess without her head. Suddenly the king's daughter fell very ill. She called her father and said to him: "If I die, make the priest's son read the psalter over me three nights in succession." The princess died, was put in a coffin, and carried to the church. The king summoned the priest and asked: "Do you have a son?" "I have, Your Majesty." "Then let him read the psalter over my daughter three nights in succession." The priest returned home and told his son to make ready. 
 In the morning the priest's son went to his lesson and sat listless over his book. "Why are you so sad?" the old woman asked him. "How can I help being sad when I am sure that I am to perish?" "What do you mean? Explain yourself!" "I must read the psalter over the princess, and she is a sorceress." "I 
 
 knew that before you did," the old woman said. "But do not be afraid. Here is a knife for you; when you come to the church, make a circle round you, read the psalter, and do not look behind you. Whatever happens, whatever terrors beset you, keep on reading and reading. But if you look back, you will be altogether lost." At night the boy went to the church, traced a circle around himself with his knife, and began to read from the psalter. On the stroke of twelve, the lid of the coffin opened, the princess sat up, jumped out, and cried: "Aha, now I will show you what it means to look in at my window and tell people what you saw!" She tried to jump at the priest's son, but could not cross the circle. Then she began to let loose all kinds of terrors; but no matter what she did, the boy kept on reading without looking behind him. At daybreak the princess hurled herself into the coffin as fast as she could. 
 On the next night the same events took place; the priest's son was not frightened, read without stopping till daybreak, and in the morning went to the old woman. She asked him: "Well, did you see the terrors?" "I did, grandmother." "Tonight it will be worse. Here are a hammer and four nails for you; drive the nails into the four corners of the coffin, and when you begin to read the psalter, put the hammer in front of you." At night the boy went to the church and did as the old woman had told him to do. On the stroke of twelve the coffin lid fell to the floor, and the princess rose up and began to fly in all directions and to threaten the priest's son. She let loose great terrors, then still greater ones; the boy fancied that a fire had broken out in the church, that the flames were enveloping all the walls, but he stood in his place and kept on reading without looking behind him. Before daybreak the princess hurled herself into her coffin; then the fire was gone, and the whole devilish spectacle vanished. In the morning the king came to the church; he found the coffin opened, and the princess lying in it face downward. "What is this?" he asked the boy, who then told him everything. The king ordered an aspen spike to be thrust into his daughter's chest and had her buried in the ground. And he rewarded the priest's son with money and land. 
 

