
 Once there lived an old man and an old woman who had three daughters. The husband went to the barn to get some groats; he took them and carried them into the house, but there was a hole in the bag, and the groats poured out through it. The wife asked: "Where are the groats?" To tell the truth, the groats had all dropped out. The old man went to pick them up and said: "If the Sun would warm me, if the Moon would give me light, and if the Raven would help me to gather up the groats, I would marry my eldest daughter to the Sun, my second daughter to the Moon, and my youngest daughter to the Raven." The old man began to gather his groats, and the Sun warmed him, the Moon gave him light, and the Raven helped him to pick up the groats. The old man came home and said to his eldest daughter: "Dress yourself in your finest and go out on the porch." She dressed, went to the porch, and the Sun carried her off. He also ordered his second daughter to dress in her finest and go out on the porch. She dressed and went out, and the Moon seized her and carried her off. He also said to his youngest daughter: "Dress in your finest and go out on the porch." She dressed and went to the porch; the Raven seized her and carried her off. 
 The old man said: "I think that now I will pay a visit to my son-in-law." He went to the Sun. When he came the Sun said: "What shall I offer you?" "I don't want anything," said the old man. The Sun told his wife to fry some pancakes. The wife fried them. The Sun sat in the middle of the floor, the wife 
 
 put the frying pan on him, and soon the pancakes were ready. The old man ate them. When he came home he asked his wife to fry pancakes; he sat on the floor and told her to put the frying pan with the pancake batter on him. "They won't fry on you," said his wife. "Don't argue," he answered, "they will fry." She put the frying pan on him; but, long as they kept the batter there, it did not fry, it only turned sour. In the end the old woman put the frying pan on the stove, the pancakes fried, and the old man ate his fill. 
 The next day he went to see his second son-in-law, the Moon. The Moon said: "What shall I offer you?" "I don't want anything," answered the old man. The Moon heated up a bath for him. The old man said: "It will be dark in the bathhouse." The Moon answered: "Now it will be light. Go." The old man went to the bathhouse and the Moon thrust his finger through a hole in the door; thus the bathhouse was brightly illumined. The old man steamed himself, came home, and ordered his wife to heat up a bath at night. The old woman did so; then he sent her to steam herself there. She said: "It will be too dark to steam myself." "Go, it will be light," said the old man. The old woman went, and the old man, having seen how the Moon illumined his bath, made a hole in the door of the bathhouse and thrust his finger through it. But still there was no light in the bathhouse. The old woman cried to him: "It is dark." In the end she went to get a torch and then steamed herself. 
 On the third day the old man went to see the Raven. "What shall I offer you?" asked the Raven. "I don't want anything," said the old man. "In that case, let us at least go to sleep in the attic." The Raven put a ladder against the attic opening and they climbed up. The Raven put his guest under his wing, and when the old man went to sleep, both of them fell down and were killed. 
 
 
 

