
 THERE WAS ONCE a peasant who had two sons. After his death, the two brothers married; the older took a poor wife and the younger a rich wife. They lived together and did not divide the estate. The wives began to quarrel. One said: "My husband is the elder brother, so I should have precedence." And the other said: "No, I should have precedence, for I am wealthier than you." The brothers watched all this for a time, saw that their wives did not get along together, divided their father's estate equally, and parted. The elder brother's wife bore a child every year, and his household went from bad to worse, until he was completely ruined. While he had bread and money, his heart rejoiced over his children; but when he grew poor even his children did not make him happy. He went to his younger brother to ask for help. The brother refused bluntly, saying: "You must stand on your own feet; I have growing children of my own." 
 After a short time, the poor brother again came to the rich one. "Lend me some horses at least for one day," he said. "I have no beasts to do my plowing with." "Go to the field and take a horse for a day," the rich brother said, "but take care not to overwork him." The poor man came to the field and saw some men plowing the ground with his brother's horses. "Stop!" he cried. "Who are you?" "Why do you ask?" "Because these are my brother's horses." "Don't you see," said one of the plowmen, "that I am your brother's Luck? He drinks, makes merry, and does not bother about anything, while we work for him." "Then what has happened to my Luck?" "Your Luck is lying over there behind a bush, wearing a red shirt; he doesn't do anything night or day, he just sleeps all the time." "Very well," thought the peasant, "I'll take care of you." 
 He cut himself a thick club, sneaked up to his Luck, and hit the fellow on the side with all his strength. Luck awoke and said: "Why do you want to pick a fight with me?" "Just wait," 
 
 answered the poor brother. "You'll see what a thrashing I'll give you! Look! These good people plow the ground while you sleep like a log." "Do you mean to say that you want me to plow for you? Don't expect anything like that!" "So you intend to lie here behind the bush? That way I'll starve!" "If you want me to help you, drop your farming and engage in trade. I am not used to your kindof work, but I am well versed in all kinds of business." "You want me to engage in trade? But with what? I have not even enough money to buy food, let alone for starting a business." "Well, you can take your wife's old dress and sell it; for the money buy a new one and sell it too; I will help you and won't leave you for a minute." "Very well," said the peasant. 
 Next morning the poor man said to his wife: "Well, wife, make ready, we're going to town." "What for?" "I want to join the merchants' guild and engage in trade." "Are you in your right mind? We have nothing to feed our children with, and now you want to go to town!" "Don't argue with me! Pack all our belongings, take the children, and let us go." They made ready, said their prayers, began to lock their little hut, and heard someone weeping bitterly in the cellar. The peasant asked: "Who is weeping there?" "It is I, Misery." "Why are you weeping?" "How can I help weeping? You're going away and leaving me here." "No, my dear, I'll take you with me, I won't desert you. Hey, wife, throw your things out of this coffer." The wife emptied the coffer. "Now, Misery, crawl into the coffer." Misery crawled in; the peasant locked it with three locks, buried the coffer in the earth, and said: "Perish, accursed Misery! Let me never in my life know you again." 
 The poor man came to town with his wife and children, rented a lodging, and began to trade. He took his wife's old dress, carried it to the bazaar, and sold it for a ruble; with that ruble he bought a new dress and sold it for two roubles. Through such lucky deals, getting double his cost for everything he sold, he enriched himself in a very short time and joined the merchants' guild. His younger brother heard about this, came to visit him, and asked: "Tell me, please-how have you managed to turn from a beggar into a rich man?" "That's 
 
 
 
 very simple," the merchant answered. "I locked Misery into a coffer and buried it in the earth." "Where?" "In the village, in my own old home." The younger brother was almost in tears from envy; he straightway drove to the village, dug up the coffer, and set Misery free. "Go to my brother," he said. "Ruin him to the last thread." "No," said Misery, "I'd rather stay with you. I won't go to him; you're a kind fellow, you let me go free. Your brother is an evildoer, he put me into the ground." After a short time the envious brother was ruined, and turned from a wealthy peasant into a penniless beggar. 
 
 
