 ONCE THERE WAS an old man who lived with his wife. The wife constantly abused her husband; not a day passed on which she did not beat him with a broomstick or oven fork; he had no peace with her at all! He went into the field with some traps and set them. He caught a crane and said to him: "Be like a son to me! I will take you to my home and perhaps she won't scold me so much." The crane answered: "Little father! Come home with me!" So they set out for the crane's house. When they arrived the crane took a sack from the wall and said: "Two out of the sack!" At once two strong fellows climbed out of the sack, set oaken tables, spread silken cloths, and served food and drink of various kinds. The old man beheld delicacies such as he had never seen in his life, and rejoiced greatly. The crane said to him: "Take this sack and bring it to your wife." 
 The old man took the sack and went home; he went the long way, and stopped to spend the night with his godmother, who had three daughters. They made a supper for him, out of whatever they had on hand. The old man tasted it and said to his godmother: "Your fare is poor!" "It is all we have," answered the godmother. So he said: "Remove your fare!" And he spoke to the sack as the crane had bidden him to: "Two out of the sack!" At once two men jumped out of the sack, set up oaken tables, spread silken cloths, and served food and drink of various kinds. 
 The godmother and her daughters were amazed and decided to rob the old man of his sack. The godmother said to her daughters: "Go, heat up a bath; perhaps my godson will steam himself a little." As soon as he went to the bath, the godmother commanded her daughters to sew up a sack exactly like the old man's; they sewed it, put it in the place of the old man's, and took his own for themselves. The old man came out of the bath, took the new sack, and cheerfully went home to his wife. While still in the yard he called in a loud voice: "Old woman, 
 
 old woman, come to meet me and my son the crane!" The old woman cast a quick glance at him and muttered between her teeth: "Just wait, old dog, till I get after you with this oven fork." But the old man kept repeating: "Old woman, come to meet we with my son, the crane!" He entered the hut, hung the sack on a hook, and cried: "Two out of the sack!" No one came out. He cried again: "Two out of the sack!" Again no one came out. The old woman thought he was raving, seized a wet broom, and began to belabor him. 
 The old man became frightened, wept, and went back into the field. Out of nowhere the crane appeared, saw his misfortune, and said: "Come, little father, come again to my house." So they went. Another sack just like the first one hung on the wall. "Two out of the sack!" said the crane. Two men climbed out of the sack and served a magnificent dinner, just as the other men had done. "Take this sack," the crane said to the old man. He took it and went home; he walked and walked along the road, got hungry, and, as the crane had told him to, said: "Two out of the sack!" Two strong men with big sticks climbed out of the sack and began to thrash him, saying: "Go not to the godmother, steam not in the bath!" They thrashed and thrashed him until he managed to say: "Two into the sack!" The moment he said this the two men went back into the sack. 
 The old man took the sack and went on; he came to the same godmother, hung his sack on a hook, and said: "Heat a bath for me." She did. He went to the bath, steaming himself a little, but mainly passing the time away. The godmother called her daughters and told them to sit down, for she was hungry. "Two out of the sack!" said she. Two strong men with big sticks climbed out of the sack and began to thrash the godmother, saying: "Return the old man's sack!" They thrashed and thrashed her. Then she said to her eldest daughter: "Go and call my godson from the bath; tell him that the two men have beaten me up!" "I have not steamed myself yet," answered the old man. And they thrashed her with more blows, saying: "Return the old man's sack!" The godmother sent her second daughter, saying: "Hurry, bring my godson back into the room." He answered: "I have not yet washed my 
 
 
 
 head!" The godmother could not bear it any longer; she ordered her daughter to bring back the stolen sack. Then the old man came out of the bathroom, saw his old sack, and said: "Two into the sack!" The two men with the sticks went back into it. 
 The old man took both sacks, the punishing one and the kindly one, and went home. While he was still in the yard he called to his wife: "Come, meet me and my son the crane!" She cast a quick glance at him and said: "Just wait till you come into the hut, I'll thrash you!" The old man came into the room and called to his wife: "Sit down!" Then he said: "Two out of the sack!" The two men climbed out of the sack and served food and drink. The old woman ate and drank her fill and praised her husband: "Well, old man, now I won't thrash you!" The old man, having eaten, went into the yard, put the kindly sack into the larder, hung the punishing one on a hook, and walked about in the yard, not so much to walk as to pass the time. 
 The old woman wanted to drink some more, so she repeated the words she had heard her husband say: "Two out of the sack!" Two men with big sticks climbed out of the sack and began to thrash the old woman; and they thrashed her so hard that she could bear it no longer. She called her husband: "Old man, old man, come into the hut, the two men are beating me up!" But he walked around, laughing and saying: "They'll show you how it's done!" The two men thrashed the old woman even harder, repeating: "Don't thrash your husband! Don't thrash your husband!" At last the old man took pity on her, came in, and said: "Two into the sack!" And the two men disappeared into the sack. From that time on the old man and his wife lived in such peace and friendship that he always boasted of her goodness, and that is the end of the story. 
 

