
 A certain prince married a beautiful princess, but before he had had time to feast his eyes upon her and listen to her sweet speech, he was compelled to separate from her, go on a far journey, and leave his wife in the hands of strangers. What was there to do? It is said that you cannot spend your life in embraces. The princess wept a great deal, and the prince comforted her a great deal, admonishing her not to leave the women's apartments, not to keep company with evil people, and not to listen to evil words. The princess promised to do all this. The prince departed; the princess locked herself in her room and did not go out. 
 After a long time or a short time, a woman came to her. She seemed so simple and kindly! "Why are you pining away here?" she said. "You should at least have a peep at God's world and take a walk in your garden, to dispel your grief and get a breath of fresh air." For a long time the princess refused, but in the end she thought: "Surely there is no harm in taking a walk in the garden!" And out she went. In the garden there was a spring of crystalline water. "The day is so hot," said the woman, "the sun is blazing, and the water is cool. It bubbles so invitingly; why should we not bathe in it?" "No, no," said 
 
 the princess, "I do not want to!" But then she thought: "There is no harm in having a bath." She slipped off her gown and jumped into the water. No sooner had she plunged in than the woman struck her on the back, saying: "Swim now as a white duck!" And the princess turned into a white duck. The witch straightway attired herself in the princess' garment, adorned and painted herself, and sat down to await the prince. As soon as the puppy barked and the little bell rang, she ran out to meet the prince, rushed toward him, kissed him, and fondled him. He was overjoyed, stretched out his arms toward her, and did not realize that she was not his wife. 
 Meanwhile the white duck laid eggs and hatched its young. Two were handsome and the third a starveling. And her babies grew into little children; she brought them up and they began to swim on the little stream, to catch little goldfish, to gather little rags, to sew little coats, and to jump up on the banks and look at the meadows. "Oh, don't go there, my children," the mother said. The children disobeyed her; one day they played in the grass, the next day they ran over the meadow, ever farther and farther, until they reached the prince's courtyard. The witch recognized them by their smell and gritted her teeth; she called the children, gave them food and drink and put them to sleep, and then ordered a fire to be lighted, kettles to be hung over it, and knives to be sharpened. The two handsome brothers lay down and fell asleep. But the little starveling, whom the mother had ordered them to carry in their bosoms that he might not catch cold-the starveling did not sleep, and heard and saw everything. In the night the witch came to their door and asked: "Are you asleep, little children, or not?" The starveling answered: "We sleep and don't sleep. We think that someone wants to slaughter us all; a fire of hazel logs is being made, boiling kettles are hanging, steel knives are being sharpened." "They are not sleeping," said the witch. 
 She went away, walked and walked about, and again came to the door: "Are you asleep, little children, or not?" The starveling said again: "We sleep and don't sleep. We think that someone wants to slaughter us all; a fire of hazel logs is being made, boiling kettles are hanging, steel knives are being sharpened." "Why is it always the same voice?" thought the witch. She softly opened the door and saw that both the handsome brothers were sound asleep. She touched them with the hand of a corpse and they died. 
 Next morning the white duck called her children, but they did not come. She felt anguish in her heart, she fluttered her wings and flew to the prince's courtyard. There, as white as kerchiefs, as cold as little fish, the two brothers lay side by side. She rushed to them, spread her wings, and put them around her children, and cried with a mother's voice: 
 Quack, quack, quack, my children, 
 Quack, quack, quack, my little doves! 
 I nursed you with fears, 
 I fed you with tears, 
 I spent dark nights ivithout sleep, 
 And for worry over you did not eat. 
 "My wife, do you hear this extraordinary thing?" said the prince. "The duck is lamenting." "You only fancy it!" said the false wife. "Have the duck driven out of the courtyard." The duck was driven out but she flew back to her children and said: 
 Quack, quack, my children, Quack, quack, my little doves! An old witch took your life, An old snake, a false wife, Because of her wicked ruse Your true father you did lose; She put us in the swift stream, Turned us into white ducks, And calls herself the queen. 
 "This is strange," thought the prince, and he cried: "Catch this white duck!" Everyone rushed to catch her, but the white duck flew about and would not let herself be caught; the prince himself went out and she fell on his hands. He took her by a little wing and said: "White birch tree stand behind me, lovely maiden stand before me." A white birch stood behind him, and a lovely maiden stood before him, and in the lovely maiden the 
 
 prince recognized his young wife. At once a magpie was caught, two little bladders were tied to her, and she was ordered to fill one with the water of life and the other with the water of speech. The magpie flew away and brought back the waters. The children were sprinkled with the water of life and they shuddered; they were sprinkled with the water of speech and they began to speak. And now the prince had all his family, and they began to live and prosper and forget the evil days. As for the witch, she was tied to the tail of a horse and dragged over a field; where a leg was torn off her, a fire iron stood; where an arm was torn off, a rake stood; where her head was torn off, a bush grew. Birds came swooping down and pecked up her flesh, a wind arose and scattered her bones, and not a trace or a memory was left of her. 

