
 Two brothers were traveling together: one was poor and the other was rich, and each had a horse, the poor one a mare, and the rich one a gelding. They stopped for the night, one heside the other. The poor man's mare bore a foal during the night, and the foal rolled under the rich man's cart. In the morning the rich man roused his poor brother, saying: "Get up, brother. During the night my cart bore a foal." The brother rose and said: "How is it possible for a cart to give birth to a foal? It was my mare who bore the foal!" The rich brother said: "If your mare were his mother, he would have been found lying beside her." To settle their quarrel they went to the authorities. The rich man gave the judges money and the poor man presented his case in words. 
 Finally word of this affair reached the tsar himself. He summoned both brothers before him and proposed to them four riddles: "What is the strongest and swiftest thing in the world? 
 
 What is the fattest thing in the world? What is the softest thing? And what is the loveliest thing?" He gave them three days' time and said: "On the fourth day come back with your answers." 
 The rich man thought and thought, remembered his godmother, and went to ask her advice. She bade him sit down to table, reated him to food and drink, and then asked: "Why are you so sad, my godson?" "The sovereign has proposed four riddles to me, and given me only three days to solve them." "What are the riddles? Tell me." "Well, godmother, this is the first riddle: 'What is the strongest and swiftest thing in the world?' " "That's not difficult! My husband has a bay mare; nothing in the world is swifter than she is; if you lash her with a whip she will overtake a hare." "The second riddle is: 'What is the fattest thing in the world?' " "We have been feeding a spotted boar for the last two years; he has become so fat that he can barely stand on his legs." "The third riddle is: 'What is the softest thing in the world?' " "That's well known. Eider down -you cannot think of anything softer." "The fourth riddle is: 'What is the loveliest thing in the world?' " "The loveliest thing in the world is my grandson Ivanushka." "Thank you, godmother, you have advised me well. I shall be grateful to you for the rest of my life." 
 As for the poor brother, he shed bitter tears and went home. He was met by his seven-year-old daughter-she was his only child-who said: "Why are you sighing and shedding tears, father?" "How can I help sighing and shedding tears? The tsar has proposed four riddles to me, and I shall never be able to solve them." "Tell me, what are these riddles?" "Here they are, my little daughter: 'What is the strongest and swiftest thing in the world? What is the fattest thing, what is the softest thing, and what is the loveliest thing?' " "Father, go to the tsar and tell him that the strongest and fastest thing in the world is the wind; the fattest is the earth, for she feeds everything that grows and lives; the softest of all is the hand, for whatever a man may lie on, he puts his hand under his head; and there is nothing lovelier in the world than sleep." 
 The two brothers, the poor one and the rich one, came to the 
 
 tsar. The tsar heard their answers to the riddles, and asked the poor man: "Did you solve these riddles yourself, or did someone solve them for you?" The poor man answered: "Your Majesty, I have a seven-year-old daughter, and she gave me the answers." "If your daughter is so wise, here is a silken thread for her; let her weave an embroidered towel for me by tomorrow morning." The peasant took the silken thread and came home sad and grieving. "We are in trouble," he said to his daughter. "The tsar has ordered you to weave a towel from this thread." "Grieve not, father," said the little girl. She broke off a twig from a broom, gave it to her father, and told him: "Go to the tsar and ask him to find a master who can make a loom from this twig; on it I will weave his towel." The peasant did as his daughter told him. The tsar listened to him and gave him a hundred and fifty eggs, saying: "Give these eggs to your daughter; let her hatch one hundred and fifty chicks by tomorrow." 
 The peasant returned home, even more sad and grieving than the first time. "Ah, my daughter," he said, "you are barely out of one trouble before another is upon you." "Grieve not, father," answered the seven-year-old girl. She baked the eggs for dinner and for supper and sent her father to the king. "Tell him," she said to her father, "that one-day grain is needed to feed the chicks. In one day let a field be plowed and the millet sown, harvested, and threshed; our chickens refuse to peck any other grain." The tsar listened to this and said: "Since your daughter is so wise, let her appear before me tomorrow morning-and I want her to come neither on foot nor on horseback, neither naked nor dressed, neither with a present nor without a gift." "Now," thought the peasant, "even my daughter cannot solve such a difficult riddle; we are lost." "Grieve not," his seven-year-old daughter said to him. "Go to the hunters and buy me a live hare and a live quail." The father bought her a hare and a quail. 
 Next morning the seven-year-old girl took off her clothes, donned a net, took the quail in her hand, sat upon the hare, and went to the palace. The tsar met her at the gate. She bowed to him, saying, "Here is a little gift for you, Your Majesty," and 
 
 handed him the quail. The tsar stretched out his hand, but the quail shook her wings and-flap, flap!-was gone. "Very well," said the tsar, "you have done as I ordered you to do. Now tell me-since your father is so poor, what do you live on?" "My father catches fish on the shore, and he never puts bait in the water; and I make fish soup in my skirt." "You are stupid! Fish never live on the shore, fish live in the water." "And you-are you wise? Who ever saw a cart bear foals? Not a cart but a mare bears foals." 
 The tsar awarded the foal to the poor peasant and took the daughter into his own palace; when she grew up he married her and she became the tsarina. 
 
 
 
 
