 IN A certain kingdom, in a certain land, in a little village, there lived an old man and his old wife; they had three sons, two clever ones and a simple one. The time came for the old man to die, and he divided his money. He gave the eldest son a hundred rubles and the middle son a hundred rubles, but did not want to give anything to the simpleton, who, he thought, would lose the money anyhow. "But father," said the simpleton, "all the children are equal, whether they be wise or foolish; give me a share too." So the old man gave him a hundred rubles too. The father died and his sons buried him. Now the clever brothers set out to buy oxen at the market; the simpleton went there too. The clever ones bought oxen but the simpleton brought back a cat and a dog. Several days later the older brothers harnessed their oxen and made ready to take to the road; seeing them do this, the youngest brother also prepared to go. "What are you doing, simpleton?" they asked. "Why do you want to go? So that people can laugh at you?" "That's my business!" the simple brother replied. "The roads are open to the wise and they are not closed to the foolish!" 
 The simpleton took his dog and his cat, slung a bag over his shoulder, and left the house. He walked and walked, till he came to a big river; he had not a penny to pay at the ferry. The simpleton did not stop to think very long; he gathered dry branches, made a hut on the shore, and started to live in it. His dog began to hunt all around the neighborhood; it stole crusts of bread, took care of itself, and fed its master and the cat as well. One day a ship laden with all kinds of merchandise sailed down the river. The simpleton saw it and cried: "Hey, Mr. Shipmaster! You are sailing to trade; take my merchandise too and share half-and-half with me." And he threw his cat on board the ship. "What do we need this beast for?" said the shipworkers, laughing. "Come on, boys, let's drop it into the water." "Look here, you," said the shipmaster, "don't touch that cat! Let it hunt rats and mice aboard ship." "Why not?" said they. "It's a bargain!" 
 
 After some time, a long time or a short time, the ship came to a foreign land where no one had ever even seen cats, and there were as many rats and mice running about there as blades of grass in the fields. The shipmaster displayed his merchandise and began to sell it. A merchant became interested, bought the whole cargo, and said to the shipmaster: "Now we must wet our bargain. Come with me, I will treat you." He brought the guest to his home, got him drunk, and ordered some clerks to take him to the barn, saying: "Let the rats devour him-then we will get all his wealth for nothing." They took the shipmaster to a dark barn and threw him on the ground. But his cat had followed him all along, having become so fond of him that it would not move a step away from him. It wriggled into the barn and fell to strangling the rats. It strangled a huge number of them. Next morning the host came and saw that the shipmaster was safe and sound and that the cat was finishing the last of the rats. "Sell me your beast," he said. "Buy it!" They bargained and bargained, and finally the merchant bought the cat for six barrels of gold. 
 The shipmaster returned to his own country, found the simpleton, and gave him three barrels of gold. "This is a lot of gold! What shall I do with it?" wondered the simpleton, and went through towns and villages dividing it among the poor. He distributed two barrels, but with the third he bought incense, piled it up in the open field, and lighted it: the sweet smoke went up to God in heaven. Suddenly an angel appeared, saying: "The Lord has commanded me to ask you what you wish." "I do not know," answered the simpleton. "Well, go over there. Three peasants are plowing the land; ask them and they will tell you." The simpleton took his stick and went to where the plowmen were working. He approached the first. "Greetings, old man!" he said. "Greetings, good fellow!" "Tell me what I should ask of the Lord." "How should I know what you want?" The simpleton did not stop to think very long; he struck the old man with his stick, right on the head, and killed him. 
 He approached the second plowman and asked again: "Tell me, old man, what should I ask of the Lord?" "How should I 
 
 know?" the man said. The simpleton struck him with his stick without even giving him time to gasp. He came to the third plowman and said: "Now you tell me, old man." The old man answered: "If you should get wealth, you might forget about God; so you had better ask for a wise wife." The simpleton returned to the angel, who asked: "Well, what have you been told?" "I was told to ask not for wealth, but for a wise wife." "Very well," said the angel. "Go to such and such a river, sit on the bridge, and look into the water. All kinds of fish will pass by you, big and small. Among these fish there will be a little perch with a golden ring. Snatch this fish and throw it behind you on the damp earth." 
 The simpleton did as he was told; he came to the river, sat on the bridge, and stared into the water. All kinds of fish swam by him, big and small, and then came the perch with a golden ring on it. He snatched it at once and threw it behind him on the damp earth, and the little fish turned into a lovely maiden. "Good day, dear friend!" she said to him. They took each other by the hand and went on their way; they walked and walked, the sun began to set, and they stopped to spend the night in the open field. The simpleton fell sound asleep, and the lovely maiden cried out in a high voice. Straightway twelve workers appeared. "Build me a rich palace with a golden roof!" the maiden ordered. In a trice the palace was ready, with mirrors and pictures and everything that could be desired. They had gone to sleep in the open field and awoke in splendid chambers. The king himself beheld the palace with the golden roof, was astonished, summoned the simpleton, and said: "Only yesterday this place was empty, and now a palace stands there! You must be a sorcerer!" "No, Your Majesty! Everything was done by God's command!" "Well, since you could build a palace in one night, you must build a bridge from your palace to my own, with one arch of silver and the other of gold-and if you have not built it by tomorrow, by my sword your head shall fall!" 
 The simpleton went away weeping. His wife met him at their door. "Why do you weep?" she asked. "How can I help weeping? The king has commanded me to build a bridge, with one 
 
 arch of gold and the other of silver; and if it is not ready by tomorrow, he will cut off my head!" "Do not worry, my soul! Go to sleep; the morning is wiser than the evening!" The simpleton lay down and fell asleep. When he arose the next morning, everything was done; the bridge was so beautiful that you could not feast your eyes enough on it! The king summoned the simpleton and said: "You have done well! Now, in one night, make apple trees grow on both sides of the bridge, and make ripe apples hang on them, and let birds of paradise sing in them and strange kittens from foreign lands mew underneath them; and if all is not ready tomorrow, by my sword your head shall fall!" 
 The simpleton went away weeping; his wife met him at their door. "Why do you weep, my soul?" she asked. "How can I help weeping? The king has commanded me to make apple trees grow on both sides of the bridge, with ripe apples hanging on them, birds of paradise singing in them, and strange kittens mewing beneath them; if all this is not done by tomorrow, he will cut off my head." "Do not worry, go to sleep; the morning is wiser than the evening." Next morning, when the simpleton arose, everything was done: the apples were ripe, the birds were singing, and the kittens were mewing. The simpleton picked some of the apples and brought them to the king on a dish. The king ate one apple, then another, and said: "You deserve praise! I have never yet tasted such sweetness! Well, brother, since you are so clever, go to the other world, find my deceased father, and ask him where his money is hidden. And if you do not find him, remember this-by my sword, your head shall fall!" 
 Again the simpleton went away weeping. "Why do you shed tears, simpleton?" his wife asked him. "How can I help weeping? The king has bidden me go to the other world to ask his dead father where his money is hidden." "This is not yet a misfortune! Go to the king and ask him to send with you as companions the proud men who give him such evil counsel." The king named two boyars as the simpleton's companions. His wife fetched a ball of thread. "Take this," she said. "Go boldly wherever the ball rolls." 
 
 The ball rolled and rolled, straight into the sea; the sea parted and a way was opened; the simpleton took a few steps, and he and his companions found themselves in the other world. He looked around and saw that devils had harnessed a load of wood to the king's dead father and were prodding him with iron rods. "Stop!" cried the simpleton. The devils raised their horned heads and asked: "And what do you want?" "I must have a word or two with that dead man whom you have harnessed to a load of wood." "What an idea! As though there were time to talk! The fire in our hell might go out!" "Fear not, you will get there on time; take these two boyars in his place, they will move the wood even faster!" The devils quickly unharnessed the dead king, harnessed the two boyars in his place, and drove them to hell with the wood. The simpleton said to the king's father: "Your son, our sovereign, sent me to ask Your Grace where the old treasure is hidden." "The treasure lies in deep cellars behind the stone wall; but virtue is not in them. Tell my son this: if he rules the kingdom with as little truth as I did, the same thing will happen to him as happened to me! You can see for yourself how the devils have tormented me, how they have whipped my back and sides to the very bone. Take this ring and give it to my son for added proof." Just as the king said these words, the devils came back. "Ho-ho!" they said. "This is a fine pair! Let us drive them once more!" The boyars cried to the simpleton: "Have pity on us, do not give us over to the devils, take us back while we are still alive!" The devils unharnessed them and the boyars returned with the simpleton to the white world. 
 They came to the king. He beheld the boyars and was horrified by their appearance: their faces were hollow, their eyes were staring, and iron rods protruded from their sides. "What happened to you?" the king asked. The simpleton answered: "We were in the other world; I saw that the devils had harnessed your deceased father to a load of wood, so I stopped them and gave them these two boyars to replace him. While I spoke with your father, the devils used them to cart wood." "And what is my father's message?" "He told me to say that if Your Majesty rules the kingdom with as little truth as he did, 
 
 the same thing will happen to you as happened to him. And he sent you this ring for an added proof." "This is not what I want to know! Where is the treasure hidden?" "The treasure is in deep cellars behind the stone wall." Straightway a whole company of soldiers was called and they began to break down the stone wall; they broke it, and behind the wall they found barrels of silver and gold-a treasure beyond counting! "Thank you, brother, for your service," said the king to the simpleton. "Only do not be angry with me. Since you were able to go to the other world, get for me the self-playing gusla; and if you do not get it, by my sword your head shall fall!" 
 The simpleton went away weeping. "Why do you weep, my soul?" his wife asked him. "How can I help weeping? No matter how much I serve, I must lose my head! The king has commanded me to get for him the self-playing gusla." "That is nothing at all; my brother makes them." She gave him a ball of thread and a towel that she herself had made, and instructed him to take with him the king's councilors, the same two boyars as before, and said: "Now you are going away for a very long time. The king may do an evil deed, he may be tempted by my beauty! Go to the garden and cut three twigs." The simpleton cut three twigs in the garden. "Now strike the palace and myself with these twigs three times each, and God speed you!" The simpleton struck; his wife turned into a stone, and the palace turned into a stone mountain. Then the simpleton took the king's two boyars and set out on his way: wherever the ball rolled, he followed. 
 After some time, a long time or a short time, and after he had gone some distance, a long distance or a short one, the ball rolled into a thick forest, straight to a little hut. The simpleton entered the hut and there found an old woman sitting. "Greetings, little grandmother!" he said. "Greetings, my good man! Whither is God taking you?" "Little grandmother, I seek a master who can make a self-playing gusla for me, one that plays by itself, and that plays such tunes that everyone is forced to dance to its music willy-nilly." "Ah, my own son makes such guslas! Wait a while, he will soon be home." After a little while the old woman's son came home. "Master," the simpleton said 
 
 to him, "make a self-playing gusla for me." "I have a gusla all made and ready; I will give it to you as a gift, but on this condition: when I tune the gusla, no one must sleep! And if anyone falls asleep and fails to rise when I call him, he must lose his head!" "Very well, master!" 
 The master set to work and began to tune the self-playing gusla; one of the boyars became dreamy from the sound of the music and fell sound asleep. "Are you sleeping?" the master called to him. The boyar did not rise nor answer, and his head rolled on the floor. After two or three minutes, the other boyar fell asleep; his head also came off his shoulders. Another minute passed, and the simpleton dozed off. "Are you sleeping?" the master called. "No," said the simpleton. "I am not sleeping! Only my eyes stick together from weariness after my journey. Have you not some water? I want to wash them." The old woman brought some water. The simpleton washed himself, took his embroidered towel, and began to wipe himself. The old woman glanced at the towel, recognized her daughter's handiwork, and said: "Ah, my dear son-in-law! I did not expect to see you. Is my daughter well?" And at once they fell to kissing and embracing. For three days they rejoiced, and ate and drank and refreshed themselves. Then came the time to say farewell. The master gave his brother-in-law the self-playing gusla as a farewell gift; the simpleton took it under his arm and set out on his way home. 
 He walked and walked, came out of the thick forest onto the highway, and made the self-playing gusla play-if he had been listening to it for a hundred years, he would still not have heard it enough! He happened to meet a brigand. "Give me your self-playing gusla," the fellow said, "and I will give you my stick!" "And what is your stick good for?" "Oh, it is not an ordinary stick. Just say to it: 'Eh, stick, strike and hit!' and it will kill a whole army!" The simpleton exchanged the gusla for the stick, took the stick, and commanded it to kill the brigand. The stick flew at the brigand, hit him once or twice, and slew him. The simpleton took back the self-playing gusla and went on. 
 He came to his own country. "Why should I go to the king?" 
 
 he thought. "There is time for that! I would rather see my wife first." He struck the stone mountain with his three twigs, once, twice, thrice, and the marvelous palace was there; he struck the stone, and his wife stood before him. They embraced, greeted each other, exchanged two or three words; then the simpleton took the gusla-and he did not forget the stick-and went to the king. When the king saw him, he thought: "Ah, there is no way to get rid of him, he fulfills every task!" He fell upon the simpleton, cursing and shouting: "You miserable wretch! Instead of reporting to me immediately, you went first to embrace your wife!" "I beg pardon, Your Majesty!" "I cannot make a fur coat out of your contrition! Nothing you say will win my forgiveness. Hand me my steel sword!" The simpleton saw that the time had come to settle their accounts, and cried: "Eh, stick, strike and hit!" The stick flew at the king, struck him once, struck him twice, and slew him. And the simpleton became king in his stead and ruled long and mercifully. 
 
 

