
 Once upon A time there was a goat who built herself a little hut in the woods and lived there with her kids. She often went deep into the forest to look for food; whenever she left the hut the kids locked the little door and stayed inside. When the goat returned she would knock at the door and sing: "My little baby kids, unlock the door and open it! I, the she-goat, have been in the forest; I have eaten soft grass and drunk spring water. Milk flows down in the udder and from 
 
 the udder to the hoof and from the hoof into the damp earth." The kids would at once open the door and let their mother in. Then she would feed them and go again into the forest, and the kids would lock the door very tight. 
 The wolf overheard all this. Once when the goat had gone to the forest he came to the little hut and cried in his rough voice: "Hey, little kids, hey, my dear ones, unlock the door and open it! Your mother is hack and has brought you milk aplenty." But the kids answered: "We hear you, we hear you, but yours is not our mother's voice! Our mother sings in a soft voice and sings different words." The wolf went away and hid himself. Then the goat came and knocked at the door, singing: "My little baby kids, unlock the door and open it! I, the she-goat, have been in the forest, I have eaten soft grass and drunk spring water. Milk flows down in the udder and from the udder to the hoof and from the hoof into the damp earth." The kids let their mother in and told her that the wolf had come and tried to devour them. The goat fed them and when she left again for the woods gave them strict orders not to let in anyone who might come to the little hut and beg in a rough voice saying other words than she said. As soon as the goat was gone the wolf ran to the little hut, knocked at the door, and began to chant in a soft voice: "My little baby kids, unlock the door and open it! I, the she-goat, have been in the forest, I have eaten soft grass and drunk spring water. Milk flows down in the udder to the hoof and from the hoof into the damp earth." The kids opened the door and the wolf ran in and ate them all; only one little kid escaped by hiding in the stove. 
 The goat came back, but no matter how sweetly she sang, no one answered her. She came closer to the door and saw that it was open; she looked into the room and saw that it was empty; she looked into the stove and found one kid there. 
 When the goat learned of her misfortune, she sat down on a bench, began to weep bitterly, and sang: "Oh, my baby kids, why did you open the door to the wicked wolf? He has devoured you all, and left me with great grief and sadness in my soul." The wolf heard this, came into the hut, and said to the goat: "Ah, neighbor, neighbor, why do you slander me? Would 
 
 I do such a thing? Let us go to the forest together and take a walk." "No, neighbor, I have no heart for walking." "Let us go," the wolf insisted. 
 They went into the forest and found a pit in which some brigands had recently cooked gruel. There was still some fire left in it The goat said to the wolf: "Neighbor, let us see which of us can jump across the pit." The wolf tried first, and fell into the hot pit; his belly burst from the heat of the fire, and the kids ran out of it and rushed to their mother. From then on they lived happily, acquired wisdom, and eschewed evil. 
 
 
 
