Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

Z-101

ADDRESS BEFORE THE
NEW JERSEY BANKERS ASSOCIATION CONVENTION
IN ATLANTIC CITY, MAY 13, 1938
BY
MARRINER S. ECCLES
CHAIRMAN OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS
OF THE
FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM

Not to be released until 4;00 p.m» E.S.T.
Friday. May 13. 1958.

Z-10I
THE CURRENT BUSINESS AND ECONOMIC OUTLOOK
Before reviewing what seem to me to be the principal developments
leading up to the present depression and what can be and is being done
about it, I should like to make a statement of general principles as a
broad background of this discussion.
Deficit-spending on the part of government should be undertaken in a
recession to compensate for the liquidation of private debt and declining
private expenditures.

Conversely, the paying down of public debt offers a

means of compensating for too rapid an expansion of private debt and ex­
penditures.

However, at a time when national income has attained a high

level and is rapidly increasing, there should be an increase in taxes on
an equitable broad basis, not only for the purpose of reducing the public
debt if private credit is expanding rapidly, but also in order to provide
for necessary social services.

This would be desirable not merely on

humanitarian grounds but it would also be economically sound as a means of
maintaining a balance between savings and investment on the one hand and
consumption on the other.

By thus keeping up consumption at a sufficient

level to absorb production, protection would be afforded to existing in­
vestment and encouragement given to new investment.

Such a policy of main­

taining a large volume of government expenditure, on the basis of a balanced
budget and through a broad tax base, has been successfully pursued in
England and some of the other democratic countries.
Since 1933 the government l
i
a
s taken action on many fronts to meet the
maladjustments and problems created by the disastrous deflation after 1929.
The steps taken by the government were largely enforced by the necessity for

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

Z-101
- 2meeting intolerable economic and social conditions.

During this period

the public debt was increased ty about $16 billions gross.

This increase

was far less in the aggregate than the contraction of private debt had
been and was necessary to fill in part the gap created by deflation and to
restore to solvency on a national scale the country's business, which was
insolvent.
Deficit-spending by the government for the restoration of activity
was a major influence in increasing national income from less than $40
billions in 1932 to approximately $70 billions in 1937.

In other words,

the additional national income in this one year, 1937, as compared with
1932, was nearly twice as large as the total increase in the national debt
over a period of four years.

In view of this record, what becomes of the

claim that this expenditure of public money was wasted or that the program
of deficit-spending was a failure?
The increase in the government debt was brought about at a constantly
decreasing interest cost due, in part, of course, to the excess reserves
which accumulated in the banking system largely through the importation
of foreign capital as reflected in gold imports.

In fact, for the nation

as a whole, the burden of debt was lightened, despite the increase in
government debt.

From 1932 to 1936, inclusive, net interest payments for

the entire country, as reported in the national income estimates of the
Department of Commerce, declined from $4.9 billions to $4.4 billions, or
from 12 per cent of the national income to less than 7 per cent.

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

In

Z-101
- 5 -

effecting this program, the government sold its securities to individuals
and business corporations which had idle balances, as well as to commercial
banks after they had been provided with reserves.

Thus the government was

able to put to work existing idle funds of individuals and corporations as
well as newly created deposits in the banking system.

In addition to build­

ing up deposits, which had shrunk by nearly 40 per cent due to the deflation,
the effect of the government's action was to create business that otherwise
would not have been created.
The resultant debt is debt to our own people.

The interest being

paid on it is being paid to the individuals and to corporations and banks
that are the holders of these obligations, and as they are refunded or paid
off the proceeds go to our own people and institutions.
out is an expense of government.

This interest paid

It is a charge against all of us, but the

payment of this interest returns these funds to the spending and invest­
ment stream.

Stated otherwise, the operations of the government in borrow­

ing, spending and lending money, not only created new money, but resulted
in a more active use of the existing supply by increasing production and
distribution of goods and services, which are the only real wealth.
The greatest difficulties in dealing with the problem of deficitspending and of management of public debt seem to me to be problems of
correct timing.

Obviously, public debt must not be piled up to a point

where unsound inflationary results destroy the very purpose of the policy

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

Z-101
- 4 -

I have in mind— which is to manage fiscal and monetary policy, despite
the definite limitations of the effects of such policy, so that it has a
stabilizing and moderating influence to offset distortions in the
functioning of the general economy— distortions and violent swings between
booms and depressions that impoverish and demoralize and threaten the very
existence of the whole system.
Consider for a moment the importance of proper timing:

Even though

we had no public debt whatever, deficit-spending could be very inflationary
if it came at a time when our economic machine was already working at full
capacity.

Merely to increase government spending, if offset by increased

taxation derived from increased income, would not be inflationary.

It is

the spending above receipts that brings about an increase both in the supply
and velocity of money.

Conversely, deficit-spending at a time when private

spending is declining, tends to compensate for this by increasing buying
power.
The danger in wrong timing is illustrated by our experience since 1929.
Although there was an unprecedented contraction in private activity, adequate
deficit-spending and lending was delayed for more than three years, during
which time deflationary forces gathered so much momentum that it required a
far greater amount of money and effort on the part of the government to turn
the tide than otherwise would have been necessary.

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

Z-101
-

5

-

Then, beginning in 1934 and through 1935 and up until the end of 1936
we experienced on the whole an orderly recovery.

The general average of

wholesale prices rose from the depression lows and a reasonably sound re­
lationship of prices was brought about, particularly as between agricultural
prices, which had been out of balance during the twenties, and the rest of
the price structure.
The year 1936 witnessed the most pronounced forward movement by
private capital since 1929.

According to estimates of our Division of Re­

search and Statistics, expenditures on durable producers' goods in 1936
had grown to more than

billions, a gain of $2-| billions above 1933

levelsj similarly, expenditures on consumers' durable goods— houses, auto­
mobiles and household goods— amounted to over $8 billions in 1936, a gain
of $4§ billions above 1933.

The volume of domestic corporate security

issues in 1936 exceeded $4^ billions, of which $1,200,000,000 was for new
capital purposes, and commercial bank loans expanded by a billion dollars.
In other words, private business expansion was going ahead at a very satis­
factory rate, business indexes uniformly reflected a broad recovery,
corporate profits in most lines were very largely restored and in some
instances even exceeded 1929 levels, despite a smaller volume of business.
However, government relief and other expenditures were not reduced and, in
addition, between $1^ and $2 billions of bonus funds was poured into the
spending stream in the last half of 1936.

I want to make clear that I am

not now talking about the merits of the bonus, but merely the timing of its
payment.

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

It might have been very desirable from an economic standpoint had

Z-101
-6it been paid at the bottom of the depression instead of in tho year of
greatest recovery.

Similarly, the collection of $1 billion of social

security taxes in 1937 diminished buying power at the very time an increase
in retail sales was most needed.

Had it not been for these two measures,

national buying power would have increased less in 1936 and more in 1937•
As it was, we had a very large concentration of both public and private
expenditures in 1936 which gave a pronounced impetus to buying and generated,
along with other factors, an inflationary psychology.
It played a large part in stimulating the probably unprecedented wave
of inventory buying that took place late in 1936 and during the first
quarter of 1937.

In the following year, 1937, in sharp contrast there was,

of course, no bonus payment and, as I have said, in that year the govern­
ment began collecting social security taxes taken largely out of consumer
buying power.

The amount the government contributed to tho spending stream

declined by $3 billions in a single year.

In the first nine months of the

current fiscal year cash receipts of the federal government actually exceeded
cash expenditures by $100 millions.
This drastic reversal could have been offset only by a compensating
private expansion.

Yet where could we look for that?

The three major

depressed fields, where depression had struck the hardest, where unemploy­
ment was greatest, where deferred maintenance and needed expansion were
greatest, were housing and construction above all others, and in the rail­
road and utility industries.

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

Z-101
-7In housing the deficit was so great that we needed to build an
estimated 700,000 new units annually for five years in order to make up
for the deficiency caused by the depression and take care of current re­
quirements, assuming that we were going to maintain a standard of housing
which at best for most of our people would be inadequate measured by
reasonable living standards and the capacity of our economy to provide
modern housing.

Measured by the ability of our people to pay for housing,

either through ownership or rent, on the basis of present housing costs
and greatly reduced incomes, we may soon even have an excess, although we
are not building at present more than 40 per cent of the amount we normally
should be building.
These conditions are due to the fact that beginning in the fall of
1936, basic material prices, hourly wage rates and contractors' margins
in the building trades rose sharply to what proved to be prohibitive levels
so far as mass buying power was concerned.

Instead of a continuation of

building activity which had begun to revive in 1936, the revival was checked
in the spring of 1937.

Accordingly, there was no increase in activity and

expenditure in this most important of all fields to offset the decline in
the government's contribution.
As for railroads, the Class I roads showed net earnings of $165 millions
in 1936.

Programs were under way, as fast as earnings and ability to finance

them made it possible, for the purchase of greatly needed new equipment and to
meet the large amount of deferred maintenance resulting from the depression

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

Z-101
-

years.

8 -

At this juncture, however, wage increases effective in the last

half of 1937 amounted to $130 millions while $70 millions more were re­
quired to meet increased social security taxes, or combined additional
costs of $200 millions.

Under these circumstances, the railroads, lacking

sufficient earnings and in many instances unable to obtain new credit, were
forced to a curtailment in their capital outlays for equipment and deferred
maintenance.
In the private utility field there was a prospect for a considerable
investment of private capital on replacement, modernization and extension,
but it could not be expected that private funds would readily flow into
this field so long as uncertainty prevailed as to the legal and financial
status of the industry.

Public expenditures in this field did not nearly

compensate for the absence of private expenditure.
As I have attempted to show, the transition from large deficit-spending
to no deficit-spending was not successfully completed due primarily to the
fact that private capital did not expand sufficiently in the three great
fields enumerated.

It is evident that a condition favorable for expansion

of private investment must be created or public spending and investment must
be continued.

Otherwise, depression is inevitable.

The combination of forces beginning late in 1936 led to a wave of in­
ventory buying that probably has never been exceeded in so short a period.
Business and banking leaders and organizations very generally were antici-

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

Z-101
-9pating and some were predicting an inflationary development, even though
warned by government that an inflation could and would be controlled.

The

predictions of inflation, the sharply rising prices of basic materials, wide­
spread labor troubles, foreign demand for war materials, the policy of many
lines of industry of advancing prices, all combined to generate forward buy­
ing which was not geared to current consumption or consumer buying power.
For a period of five months wholesale prices of durable goods, which had
been virtually stationary since the end of 1933, rose at the rate of 24 per
cent per annum.

Between October of 1936 and May of 1937 average hourly

earnings in manufacturing rose 13 per cent.

Between September and April the

index of machine tool orders rose from 118 to 282.

A survey by Dun & Brad-

street of 17,000 firms indicates that inventories of manufacturing and
merchandising companies increased by $2 billions in 1936 and $3 billions
in 1937.
The profits of many industries were larger than they had ever been,
yet prices were advanced and it was only natural that under such circum­
stances labor should seek to obtain a larger share in the rising profits.
In some cases industry increased prices far more than enough to offset in­
creased wages, or increased wages in the hope of avoiding labor organization
in their plants.
Incomes of the great mass of the consuming public did not keep pace
and were, therefore, not sufficient to buy housing and other products of
industry that had rapidly advanced in price.

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

Z-101
- 10 -

The responsibility for these developments must be widely shared by
business, organized labor and government.

Business capitalized on a

sellers1 market, and in many instances, advanced prices more than was
justified by increasing costs.

Organized labor, in many cases, sought to

increase wages and decrease hours faster than efficiency, and this resulted
in rising unit costs.
was unstabilizing.

The rapid decrease in net government expenditures

In addition, the announcement of the British rearmament

program and the emergence of inflation propaganda also contributed to the
excessive forward commitments by business.
While the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System raised re­
serve requirements in the summer of 1936 and again in the early part of
1937, the Board took pains to emphasize that the System's policy of monetary
ease would be maintained.

In March, 1937, in order to refute the contention

by some banking leaders that the way to meet the situation was to tighten
money, I issued a public statement in which I said:
"I do not believe that sharp price rises in certain basic
commodities should be controlled at this stage of the recovexy
ty a restrictive money policy * * *.

The price rises to which

I refer are the result primarily of non-monetary factors in­
cluding foreign armament demands, strikes and monopolistic
practices by certain groups both in industry and organized labor.
These conditions have in turn led to speculative security and
commodity buying which serves to accelerate the price advances."

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

Z-101
- 11 -

As for the effects of wage and price policies, I said:
"Increased wages and shorter hours when they limit or
actually reduce production are not at this time in the in­
terest of the public in general or in the real interest of
the workers themselves.

When wage increases are passed along

to the public, and particularly when industries take advantage
of any existing situation to increase prices far beyond in­
creased labor costs, such action is short-sighted and in­
defensible policy from every standpoint.
"Wage increases and shorter hours are justified and
wholly desirable when they result from increasing production
per capita and represent a better distribution of the profits
of industry.

When they retard and restrict production and

cause price inflation, they result in throwing the buying
power of the various groups in the entire economy out of
balance, working a particular hardship upon agriculture, the
unorganized workers, the recipients of fixed incomes and all
consumers.

The upward spiral of wages and prices into in­

flationary price levels can be as disastrous as the downward
spiral of deflation."
It is unfortunate that the speculative buying Continued as long as
it did, for the more intensified the unbalanced condition became, the worse

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

Z-101
- 12 -

the aftermath was bound to be.

It was also unfortunate that consumers were

encouraged to purchase automobiles and innumerable other products of in­
dustry in such volume that installment consumer credit expanded at a much
more rapid rate than national income.

According to studies of the Russell

Sage Foundation, the volume of outstanding consumer credit last year actually
got back to the 1929 level.

The encouragement thus given was not in the

interest of the public, of business, or of labor.
Continued delay on the part of business, banking and labor leadership
and upon the part of Congress and government generally, in recognizing the
reasons for and the nature of the unbalanced state of the economy only de­
fers a realistic and effective application of basic remedies.

The more

momentum deflationary forces accumulate, the more the country loses in real
wealth because of idle facilities and idle man power, the more the national
income shrinks, tax revenues decline, and the more the budget becomes un­
balanced because the condition of the budget ultimately depends upon national
income.
We have seen by the experience of the past six months, as well as that
from 1929 to 1933, that permitting nature to take its course does not solve
the problems, but only accentuates them.
difficult the problems become.

The longer we wait, the more

Yet, we hear from some of the leaders in

banking and business that we should have a breathing spellj that we should
drastically reduce government expenditures in an attempt to balance the
budget; that we should repeal the excess profits and undistributed earnings

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

Z-101
- 13 taxes; that we should lift regulations on the stock market and the issuanceof securities, and do away with machinery devised for collective bargaining.
However, these alleged deterrents were not present before 1929 and did not
prevent economic collapse.
there was no recovery.

They were not present between 1929 and 1933 and

They were present when we had a large degree of re­

covery.
The prospective virtual repeal of the taxes complained of does not
appear to have benefited business.
steadily gone down.

On the contrary, business indexes have

I have always advocated exempting small corporations

from the undistributed profits tax, and I have favored exempting from this
tax all funds applied to new capital expenditure that would create employ­
ment.

But the outright repeal of the tax at this time can only have the

effect of accelerating deflationary forces, because business will not be
inclined to pay out the sums thus saved, either in dividends or for plant
purposes that would give employment while excess plant capacity exists.
Instead, the disposition will be to build up idle bank balances or to pay
off debts, both of which are deflationary.
Even assuming that removal of taxes and so-called restrictions on the
stock and security markets to be psychologically favorable to business,
the basic problems would still remain and will confront this or any other
government until they are faced and dealt with effectively.

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

Z-101
- 14 -

As for the budget, the only road to a balance is through restoration
of national income.

For the government to reduce its expenditures radically

at the very time that business is doing the same thing could only accentuate
and not alleviate deflationary forces.

Desirable as it is for the individual

or for a business concern to be out of debt# we cannot preserve our system,
we cannot have a debtor-creditor economy without creation of either public
or private debt as a necessary mechanism of business activity.
I have favored all along and still favor compensatory action by the
government and offsetting deficit-spending to counteract deflationary
forces and to create a condition for revival of private activity.

I see

no other practical way to deal with economic forces that, if left altogether
alone, disrupt and threaten to destroy our system.

Reversion to a laissez

faire philosophy under conditions prevailing in the modern world is out of
the question and the sooner this is clearly recognized, the sooner banking
and business leadership can contribute in a constructive and enlightened way
to finding practical solutions for the common problems of democracy.
Since early last fall, when it became evident that we were facing a
prolonged decline, I strongly advocated prompt government intervention on
a broad scale to deal with the maladjustments and to restore a more balanced
condition.

At that time I favored a comprehensive program developed along

the line of stimulating private activity quickly and directly through
special inducements in the housing, utility and railroad fields, and through
stepping up expenditures that would tend to maintain consumer purchasing

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

Z-101

- 15 power, which is essential for the revival of business.
The conditions which now confront us have become more acute as time
has run on.

Our plant capacity, which was more than adequate to meet the

requirements of a national income of approximately $70 billions, has be­
come excessive for today's rate of income.

Under such circumstances,

what inducement is there for industry to expand plant now?

What reason

do wo have to expect a natural upturn quickly?
Inventory accumulations, while reduced, arc still large.

According to

the survey I mentioned previously, the accumulated inventories in manu­
facturing and merchandising were $5 billions heavier than at the close of
1935.

At that time production and sales were increasing.

Since last fall

they have been declining, and the trend of sales has a lot to do with the
business man's attitude toward inventory.

To work off billions of dollars

of inventories in the face of steadily declining sales is a long, slow and,
of course, deflationary process.

Money received from consumers is not passed

along again in the form of wages, etc., but is used to retire debt or accumu­
late cash balances.

In short, a decline in inventories, while it is taking

place, is as deflationary as an expansion of inventories is inflationary.
As national income declines, imports are falling off with a consequent
decline of dollar balances and ability of foreign markets to absorb American
products,

Likewise, foreign travel and immigrant remittances decline as

national income goes down, which also has the effect of reducing foreign
trade.

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

Z-101
- 16 Business profits which were larger in 1936 and in 1937 than at any
time since the boom of 1928-29 have declined drastically.

According to

Standard Statistics reports, profits of 367 industrial corporations de­
clined 66 per cent for the first quarter in 1937 as compared with the same
quarter a year ago. This inevitably means a slowing up or stoppage of ex­
penditures for maintenance in an effort to conserve existing funds, or to
pay off debt, both of which are deflationary.
Due to more abundant crops the agricultural outlook is for lower prices
and hence lower incomes.

Through 1936 and 1937 the restoration of balanced

conditions between agriculture and industry and the revival of farm income
tended to prevent the deflation from being more severe than it was.

If

natural forces are allowed to prevail and agricultural income declines
sharply, what prospect is there of a revival of business activity arising
from purchasing power in this great section of our consuming public?
Whereas automobile production for 1936 and the first three quarters of
1937 was exceeded only by the peak year of 1929, due in large part to highpressure salesmanship and a large expansion of installment credit on un­
usually favorable terms both as to time and down payments, this installment
indebtedness is now being reduced on balance, with the consequent result
that automobile production this year is not expected to be more than onehalf of what it was in 1936 or 1937.

This leaves a gap of some $2 billions

in expenditures and hence in production and employment.

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

Z-101
- 17 These are admittedly depressing factors which I have purposely painted
in black colors because I am convinced that these are the factors which we
must consider and be prepared to remedy without further delay.

In the face

of these facts, can private business be depended upon to go ahead of its
own accord and to solve the social and economic problems thus presented,
even though business be assured of an extended breathing spell?

I wonder

how long it would be before business decided, as it did in 1932, that it was
experiencing strangulation and not a breathing spell.
The problems are not self-adjusting unless we are willing to risk a
prolonged depression with all its evil train of human misery and social
and economic upheaval.

In the light of existing conditions, government

assuredly would be subject to criticism if it failed to feel a responsibility
for undertaking remedial action and failed to assert leadership of which only
a government is capable in cooperation with business, labor and agricultural
leadership.
Business, labor and agricultural organizations, as well as government,
have grave social responsibilities.

The responsibility of government is

recognized by everyone, but, by and large, I do not believe that the re­
sponsibilities to the public of privately organized groups have been either
recognized or discharged.

I have heard much about cooperation.

I have yet

to hear of any organized group of industry or of labor proposing to make a
serious study as to how their policies and practices may contribute to
economic balance.

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

That apparently is regarded as the exclusive responsibility

Z-101
- 18 of government and, yet, to complete the picture, the efforts of government
to discharge that responsibility are all too frequently condemned and re­
sisted.
In the light of present economic conditions as I have outlined them,
would not the government be neglecting its responsibility if it failed to
act to counteract the current deflationary forces, pending efforts on the
part of government in cooperation with private groups to bring about some
of the adjustments necessary to establish a better balanced relationship
in the various elements in our economy, so that recovery may go forward
again?
The recently announced spending and lending program of the government
is modest, if anything, too modest when measured by the need and gravity
of the problem.

It provides for a continuation of the current levels of

WPA, CCC, Farm Security, and public roads expenditures.

The only sub­

stantial increase is for public works, public housing and the RFC.

The

efficacy of the program will depend in large part on the speed with which
these agencies can get under way, and to the degree to which the ordinary
expenditures of the government, including armament, can be speeded up.
Every effort must be made to overcome the obstacles to a quick inauguration
of public works and public housing.

In addition, great reliance must be

placed on the degree of stimulation that the RFC can quickly create.

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

Z-101
- 19 In this latter connection I hope that the opportunity for bringing
about increased expenditures in modernizing railroad and utility equip­
ment will not be overlooked.

If sufficiently favorable terms and conditions

are offered for a limited period by the RFC, I see no reason why hundreds
of millions of dollars worth of needed new equipment and deferred main­
tenance should not be contracted for without delay.

This would put a large

number of men back to work and relieve the pressure on relief agencies.

It

would reach into heavy industries where the situation is the most depressed.
Modern equipment is badly needed and as recovery proceeds great shortages
will exist.

Therefore, the time when its construction should be done is now

when it will do the most good.

If we wait for a recovery and a restoration

of earning power, very likely there will be a combined rush to buy needed
equipment at the same time, with a resultant driving up of costs and prices
and creation of bottlenecks, both with reference to labor and productive
facilities.
It would also help to bring about a constructive adjustment if the
added wage costs imposed on the railroads in 1937 were to be suspended
until such time as railroad traffic will justify them,
I feel strongly that in a time like the present, when the government
is committed to a policy of restoring national income and employment, a
government agency, free from demand liabilities, can safely make loans on
terms and conditions that private lenders could not make because they are
necessarily more concerned with immediate prospects and liquidity con­
siderations ,

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

Z-101
- 20 The stimulus to utility construction would be more effective if the
relations of government to the industry could be definitely determined.
Personally, I believe that public funds should not be used in any way to
subsidize public competition with private industry, if this can possibly
be avoided without detriment to the general public interest.
The output of electric power in this country in 1937 was 27 per cent
over the output in 1929.

The comparable figures for Great Britain are 84

per cent, for Sweden 61 per cent, and for practically all of other important
countries, except France, substantially more than the United States.

This

is a rough indication of the extent to which the depression set the
utilities back in their growth.

While all of this lag cannot be made up,

a large portion can be and this will entail the necessity of billions of
dollars of new construction in the future.

To the extent that some of these

future requirements can be anticipated now through the offer of very
favorable financing terms, a major contribution toward greater economic
stability both now and in the future will have been made.
Although I believe that our present economic difficulties are not
monetary, nevertheless the recent monetary measures taken in conjunction
with the government’s program may be helpful and certainly will remove all
possibility of doubt, where doubt did exist, as to the adequacy of banking
resources to finance, on a most favorable basis, any public or private credit
requirements.

Desterilization of $1,400,000,000 of gold not only provides

additional bank reserves as the proceeds are spent, but by putting this unused

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

Z-101
- 21 gold to work, reduces the required new government financing by this amount.
So much for the spending and lending program.

How soon it will be

effective and its ultimate magnitude depend on the rapidity with which the
necessary adjustments I mentioned earlier will be made.

Thus in housing,

while the recent amendments to the Federal Housing Act are definitely help­
ful, further progress to reduce building costs is urgently needed.

We are

still in the position where many of the building trades unions have high
hourly rates, on paper, but no jobs, and manufacturers of materials have
high prices, but no orders.

Action is still called for to readjust the out-

of-line costs down to a point where people can afford to build houses.
Certain other prices and costs, particularly in the durable heavy goods
field, are still at their 19S7 peak levels and are standing in the way of
increased sales and production.

Reductions here would be helpful.

Whole­

sale prices of durable goods have fallen only 3 per cent since last March,
while farm prices have dropped 36 per cent.

In other industrial fields,

where competition is severe, and in agriculture, efforts must be made to
prevent the continuation of a further deflationary spiral.

For this reason

I favor putting a bottom under certain wages and prices by the establish­
ment of minimum wages.

In agriculture, to prevent a cumulative deflationary

process, I favor the policy of benefit payments and of putting a bottom under
those farm prices, through commodity credit loans, where world markets de­
termine the price.

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

Z-101
- 22 By correcting, on the one hand, the unbalanced cost and price situation
that has developed and, on the other hand, by increasing consumer buying
power, I am confident that our difficulties could be solved and that we
could recover the ground lost in recent months.

If balance can be re­

gained only through government deficit-spending and lending, our progress
will be slower and the cost in dollars and in unemployment will be greater.
Banks can assist in restoring prosperity by affording every possible
cçnstructive aid to the revival of sound private financing, and in adapting
the lending functions of the banking system to present-day conditions.
Federal and state bank examination policies, as well as the Comptroller’s
regulation governing investment policy, need to be brought into conformity
with changed conditions and modern requirements of business and industry.
Bankers cannot justly be held responsible for such restrictive governmental
banking policies as confuse soundness with liquidity or true worth with
current depressed market values.

I favor modernization of these practices

and regulations, to encourage the bankers to meet changed credit conditions
and needs within their own communities, and thus to discourage the
alternative which is multiplication of governmental agencies set up to pro­
vide credit accommodation that the banking community could and should in
normal times be adapted to extend to the public.

That accords with my

fundamental view that the responsibility of government banking and monetary
agencies is to assist the banks to function in the most efficient way to
serve the public interest.

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

Z-X01
- 23 I have covered a great deal of ground but I am convinced that a
diagnosis of our economic ills cannot be sound unless it takes account of
all of the principal lines of governmental and private activity.

All parts

of the economic organism react on each other and only by united action, under
the leadership of government, with the support of the organizations of
business, finance, labor and agriculture, can recovery be assured.

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

