By Chairman Eccles
MEMORANDUM ON ECONOMIC OUTLOOK
fill

m i • m
i

>

mi

imii mmp»

in i H
ii

<»MJWHI

•

ii

(National Outlook Conference, Department of Agriculture
Washington, D. C , October 7, 191*6, 2*00 p.m.)
Perspective
1. We have not yet found the key to maintaining economic stability. The economy has been operating under forced draft for a long time.
The war and postwar situations and the inflation which already has occurred have created distortions and maladjustments. Sooner or later,
they will have to bo corrected.
2. The problem immediately ahead is still one of controlling
inflation. Demands for many important products aro still urgent and very
large. Federal expenditures are high; foreign demand is extensive; and
the volume of purchasing power in the hands of individuals and business
is not only adequate but excessive. On balance inflation factors still
outweigh deflation factors.
3. Yet, some of the speculative pressure is being reducedr
Some pipe lines are being filled and some buying resistance to high
prices is developing. This is wholesome and desirable* It will help to
forestall further distortions and give us an opportunity to recover a
balanced foundation for long-run prosperity without going through a
drastic boom and bust# Axjy slowing down of inflationary pressures is
cause for optimism rather than pessimism.
h. Underlying economic conditions are basically strong. Backlog demands along some major line^ — construction, automobile, etc. -should prove sufficient to keep the economy n
r
,
o
i
n
g at a high level for
quite some time if distortions in the price and wage structure aro cor-*
rected and further* distortions avoided.

Record Since V-J Day
1

Ml

III

II H i

H
I

V

1. The record
respects, unsatisfactory
well from the standpoint
but has not done so well

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

since V-J Day has been satisfactory in some
in others* On the whole, the nation has done
of absorbing people into peace-time production
in maintaining a stable economy.

Favorable factors are:
(a) Nearly 11 million veterans have been demobilized
and absorbed into employment at & nxpid rate.

-2(b) A very high level of civilian employment has been
reached. Civilian employment now stands at 58
million. The highest figure during the war was
56 million.
(c) The shift from war to peace production has been
made rapidly, and output is close to capacity in
most lines.
(d) Incomes of practically all groups in the economy
are above record peacetime levels. The annual
rate of income payments is now close to 170 billion dollars which is higher than any wartime
quarter and more than twice the highest prewar
peaks of 1929 and TikO.
(e) Federal expenditures have been cut from over 100
billion dollars to an annual rate of I
4
O billion;
the budget is being brought into balance; and wo
have started on a program of debt reduction.
(f) Liquid
ued to
during
bought

asset holdings of individuals have continincrease, but at a much slower rate than
the war. More savings bonds have been
than sold by the public.

(g) Government security prices have shown great stability notwithstanding a sharp break in the stock
marie ot, and a reduction in bank holdings of such
securities.
(h) The expansion of total deposits has come to a
halt and has been reversed and interest rates,
although no longer declining, have remained low,
TTnfavorable factors are:

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

(a) Wartime controls of prices, wages, and production
wore prematurely abandoned or relaxed. The excessprofits tax was abolished at the time we needed it
most to support economic stabilization.
(b) The working week was cut at a time when increased
production was the basic solution to the inflation problem.

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

-3(c) The upward spiral of rising wages and prices has gone
too far. An upward adjustment in basic wage ratos
was necessary after the war, but in many cases it camo
too soon and in some cases it wont too far. The cost
of living has gone up sharply. Real incomes for
many groups have greatly declined. Since V-J Pay,
the price rise has amounted to moro than l/5 of that
which occurred during the entire warf This advance
in living costs has eaten into the buying power of
fixed income groups, and others who have lagged bohind in wage increases. The rising living cost has
created unrest among workers and now there is again*
danger of a period of wide-spread industrial unrest.
A socond round of wage increases is threatened early
next year unloss there is a reduction or at loast
no further increase in the cost of living. Higher
wages would call for higher prices in many cases
and thus add to inflationf TOxoro profits permit
prices should bo lowered rather than wagos increased.
(d) Prices in some areas (construction in particular,
but also for most farm products) have risen to a
point -whore they are out of lino with what people
can or are willing to pay, even at present high
levels of income»
(e) Prices of capital assets havo in some cases advanced
to untenable levels. This is true of prices of urban real estate# which are now in many areas ovor
twice proviar figures. Farm real estate prices are
also well ahead of what likely future farm incomes
can sustain. Stock prices havo also increased
sharply but the rocont decline in security markets
provides a healthy correction to a speculative overextension*
(f) Production in vital areas has been hold back by
disruptions due to strikes last winter and spring,
There has also boon withholding of goods because
of price uncertainties.
(e) These disruptions of* ^ro^uction combinod with the
large shifts in jobs and the general spirit of
relaxation after the war have held down productivity .

-k2. On balance, however, the record is fair. Most * important,
the returning veteran has been absorbed into a going economy. It would
have been very much better had this been done without any inflation but
it was better to have done it with some inflation than not at all.

Outlook
lf Now tho need is to realize that we cannot sustain prosperity by keeping up the inflation process. Inflation can only ond in collapse • To sustain prosperity, wo must place it on a stable basis. Tho
decline in the stock market and some levelling off in roal estate trices
encourages the hope that we may be able to squeeze out the speculative
factors in the economy, correct tho distortions that exist in some lines,
and maintain production and employment at high levels#
We can succeed in tho period ahead (l) if productivity per
worker can bo raised — this is most important, (2) if largo scale industrial disputes and further general wage increases can be avoided,
and (3) if business groups are willing to refrain from further price
increases, or even to lower prices and rely upon volume operations for
profits.
High income and employment require demand sufficient to buy
what the people can produce. During the 30fs demand was woofully inadequate • This basic inadequacy may woll develop again when the backlog demands have worn off, unless wo have policies and programs to forestall it. But this is not our most immediate concern. We are still in
a position — and will bo for some time -- where private demand is basically sufficient to sustain a high level of employment if maladjustments
and speculative excesses are avoided. The immediate danger is that
demand in most lines is in excess of supply.
What are the main favorable and unfavorable factors in this
picture?
2. Tho basic reason for believing that employment and incomes
may be maintained is that there still is an unprecedented domand for investment and consumption, domestic and foreign, To give a few illustrations;

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

(a) There is a huge backlog demand for housing^ especially in tho low-cost brackets. This domand has
been accumulated because tho volume of residential
construction during the war and during tho 1930*s
was exceptionally low and because the average income and number of families has increased greatly.

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

-5If building costs can be reduced froin their present
untenable levels, by improving the flow of materials,
and by increasing the efficiency of workers, the volume of residential construction ought to continue
very high for many years,
(b) Automobile production is just boginning on a large
scale. The backlog demand for automobiles is huge,
and at reasonable prices should permit a record 4
levol of a\itomobilo production for several years#
A similar situation sooms to prevail in tho case of
many othor durable consumer goods.
(o) Demand is supportod not only by high levol of current incomo but also by tho largo volume of liquid
assots accumulated during tho war. Income payments
after taxes aro now nearly 150 billion dollars a
yoar as compared with about 90 billion in 19Ul or
I
J
4
.
O billion during tho wartime pook. Liquid assots
hold by individuals aro at 180 billion dollars or
almost throe tinos tho amount outstanding at tho
end of 19^1.
(d) Roplacomervt needs for plant and equipment, as well
as expenditures for capital expansion are still
large. How long this will continuo will dopond on
the general economic outlook.
(e) Foreign demand for American goods is groatf and is
sunportod by an amplo amount of funds. The not oxport balance is now at an annual rato of about 5
billion dollars and-may be oxpectod to continue
high for some yoarsf Dollar and gold resources
of foroign countries are approximately 22 billion
dollars. Still unused credit facilities of the
ExportsImport Bank (including unused portions of
loans extended) amount to 2 f 5 billion dollars•
In addition loans arranged over the next three
years by the International Bank may amount to as
much as 5 billion*
(f) The Federal budget will continue to bo large for a
long time — possibly 30 to'35 billion or about
four times tho prewar level. Government demand
will thus continue to bo a sustaining force.

-63« While those basic sustaining forcos are still very strong,
thoy are nevertheless fickle friends. Even though you are most anxious to
buy a house or to add to your equipment, you may decide not to do so if
you consider the prico is exorbitant and the outlook unstable. Once inflationary maladjustments become excessive, a slump will result even though
people have funds and many needs remain unsatisfied.
Fortunately, it appears that inflationary pressures are lessoning in some areas. Pipe lines are gotting filled and supplies are coming
into the market in increasing volume. Buyers, wary of rising prices, havo
begun to show some restraint. These are desirable developments, but there
are still acute needs for other adjustments,

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

(a) The stock market^ after a four-year rise which increased valuos by 150 per cont, has now experienced
a decline bringing prices down to tho level a
i
? the
end of tho warf or about 20 por cont below their
high points last spring, To tho extent that this
readjustment reflects moro sober appraisal of
prospects and a lessening of inflationary psychology, it contributes to balance in the economy. As
tho stock market has a tendency to exaggerate every
movement both upward and downward, the magnitude of
the price change cannot bo considered alarming. In
any event, credit for stock market purposes, which
has been declining since early in tho year following tho raising of margin requirements, is at a
relatively low lovolt Becauso of this prudent
credit policy^ forced selling has boon practicably
non-existentf
The general level of profitsf after taxes,
is relatively hight although in many linos they
may bo kept below earlier expectations by rising
costsf
(b)

Inventory .accumulation should be watehod. Inventories have always risen sharply in any upswing
and naturally did so in recent months when civilian production incroasod on a vast scalo, When
inventorios ripe sharply thoy are almost certain
to become oxcessivo. Total inventories lately
have beon rising at an annual rate of 5 billion
dollars and are now closo to a point whore it is
important to prevont excessive accumulation, Tho
less wo overshoot the mark, tho smaller tho readjustment that will lator bo necossary.

-7(c) In certain areas prices have gone too high and downward adjustments are needed* The levelling off in
real estate prices is a healthy sign but construction costs also need to be reduced. Prices of farm
real estate and of many farm produots are also excessively high. As long as food and clothing prices
are rising it is impossible to maintain stability
in wages.

Credit Developments
In the field of credit, tho inflationary forces that were operating
earlier in the year have been moderated considerably.

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

(1) Budget expenditures dropped sharply and tax receipts
stayed up. As a result the deficit has about disappeared .
(2) 17«5 billion dollars of public marketable securities
have been retired from March 1 to October 1 by drawing on tho Treasury*s large cash balance. This has
been a wholesome influence in tho credit picture.
It has;
(a) Moderated the tendency of banks to
increase their holdings of long-term
Government securities.
(b) Reduced total (Treasury and private)
deposits from 151 billion at the end
of February to lU3 billion at the end
of September.
(c) Brought to an end the decline in longterm security yields.
(3) Notwithstanding the debt retirement program, however,
there has been a large increase in commercial and
real estate loans and consumer credit amounting to
about 2*5 billion dollars at weekly reporting member
banks since March 1. This increase has been offset
in considerable part by a decline of about 2 billion
in security loans, largely on Government securities.
(U) As distinct from the decline in total deposits, deposits held by others than the U t S. Government continued to rise by 7t8 billion from the end of February

to the end of September* Of this 3«3 billion was
in time deposits and U«5 in demand deposits. This
continued expansion in privately held deposits has
remained a major inflation factor. It was due
largely to private'credit expansion, a continued
Federal deficit and retirement of U, S, securities
held by nonbank investors.

(5) It should be noted, however, that the period of
drastic decline in the budget and in the size of
the deficit is over* This decline has operated
as a powerful deflationary force, although it was
more than offset in the total economy by inflationary forces.
Conclusion
Some points stand out clearly form tho foregoing considerations;
The Situation calls for a budgetary surplus and continued debt•retirement,
Continued efforts should be made to reduce public expenditures, Taxos should
not be further reduced under present conditions. It is desirable to increase
tax revenues, without increasing tax rates, by increasing the national income as a result of greater productivity* Such an increase in the national
incomo, together with decreased Federal expenditures, will bring about a
budgetary surplus which will make possible tax reductions later on.
Speaking of the general credit situation, there is no reason tinder
present conditions for reducing margin requirements on stock market trading
or for relaxing consumer credit restraints on durable consumer ^oods in
short supply. Credit should bo provided for productive purposes, but not
for speculation. Nor is there justification for increasing interest rates
which would greatly^ complicate the Governments problem of managing the
public debt and increase the cost*of carrying it, without the offsetting
advantage of preventing inflation.
At best, Government price or credit controls can only be a stopgap,
and fiscal policy can deal only with the money side of tho inflation problem.
The overwhelmingly vital need now is for more work and more goods -- for
increased productivity, Whether we are to have a stable economic progress
depends fundamentally now on tho industrial front, on labor and management,
on increasing output by increasing efficiency, eliminating bottlenecks and
restrictive rules and practices, including those in the construction industry, and by avoiding strikes and shutdowns. Wo all know that in our
interdependent economy a strike in one key industry paralyzes others —
strikes even by a comparatively few workers in plants that supply others
can throw many thousands out of work.

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

-9Moro work and more goods are the basic cures for inflation. That
is the only way in which labor can keep the gains from the pay increases it
has received. It-is the only way to safeguard the purchasing power of all
wages and savings. Further wage increases for the same amount of work and
output would serve only to intensify the upward pressure on prices*. Increased wages that result in increased prices are selfrdefeating.. It will
be far better to hold prices down and increase productivity •
*
- to increase
real wages «
•
- than to have further wage and price increases that would
finally result in public resistance. For this, in turn, would upset business calculations, and all long-term commitments, thereby precipitating a
recession, the severity of which would depend mainly on how long it would
take to correct the distortions and maladjustments. Only by keeping prices
down and maintaining the buying power of wages and savings can we have a
higher standard of living*
We have all the tangible elements of sustained prosperity *—
manpower, raw materials, money' supply, coupled with a vast backlog of
needs and wants. The intangibles, still needed, include self-restraint,
enlightened self-interest, the will and wisdom to translate the tangibles
into a lasting, higher standard of living.

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

