FOR RELEASE IN AFTERNOON
NEWSPAPERS OF FRIDAY,
OCTOBER 25, I9I46.

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

October 2k,

ADDRESS BETORE THE
SIXTEENTH NEW ENGLAND
BANK MANAGEMENT CONFERENCE
OF THE
NEW ENGLAND COUNCIL
IN BOSTON, OCTOBER 25, I9I46.

BY
MARRINER S . ECCLES
CHAIRMAN OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS
OF THE
FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM

191+6.

It is ten years since I had the privilege of meeting with you
at a bank management conference.of the New England Council, The Axis
cloud was then just beginning.to blacken the skies over Europe and the
Orient, Few were aware of its ominous portent*< We were still struggling
up from the deepest depression*ip our economic history, A decade ago
most bankers and businessmen were worried about the Federal debt,, the
unbalanced budget and the danger of inflation. The gross national debt
had reaphed nearly 3
J
4
. billion dollars*
No one then could have foreseen the events of the next decade.
After the most devastating of all wars, we ^ind ourselves today with a
gross national debt of 265 billion dollars, or nearly eight times as much
as it was ten years ago. Today, we no longer have a great slack of unemployment; We do have accumulated wants and n^eds beyond all past
experience. The backlog of savings, available to individuals and business in the form of currency, bank- deposits and Government securities,
is from three to four times as groat as in 1936, and current income
payments are running at a rate of about 170 billion dollars a year, or
more than double the highest prewar peaks of 1929 and 19U0# The inflationary potential thus continues to be great — and war-time controls
intended-to keep the flood of money,in-check until production could
catch up with demand have been largely abandoned,
Jf wo are to avoid going through a painful period of readjustment of distortions in the wage-price structure, we must now rely primarily upon self-imposed restraint on the part of powerful conflicting
groups in management and business, in labor and in agriculture. Responsibility for maintaining orderly economic progress, which v/ill prevent a
further inflationary development that would inevitably bo followed by a
decline has now largely, shifted from Government to labor and management,
Thb unity of purpose, which enabled us to achieve a miracle
of production for war and thus to hasten the victory# is gone, and with
it public support of the direct controls over materials, wages, profits
and prices that prudent policy in the national interest seemed to require while inflationary forces were still dominant. Fiscal policy and
scattered credit controls are about all that remain to the Government
as protective measures but these, too, are beset by increasing contro-*
versy and are likewise dependent upon majority will*
Popular revulsion against direct controls and other restraints,
of course, is natural-in the aftermath of war. Certainly freedom of expression and the interplay of phe point of view of manifold social and
economic groups is the life blood of a progressive democracy. But this
democratic freedom should npt be a license.for special interest groups
to seek their own ends- wi.thout. regard for the public good. This spirit
of unenlightened self-interest has increasingly pervaded our national
life since the end of the war,- If we are to make our economic and
political system function successfully we must find means of settling
conflicts of interest by lawful and peaceful democratic processes, without disrupting economic stability and progressf

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

-2We see examples of conflicting interests on all sides. For
instance, most, cattlemen object to control of livestock prices, but
want the Government to stop a railroad or coal strike if it threatens
to interfere with distribution of their products; most farmers oppose
ceilings on the prices of their products, but want price floors; in
general, labor unions object to wage controls, but want the Government
to control prices; most businessmen favor curbs on wages but not on
profits; bankers want the Government to balance the budget, but many
also advocate higher interest rates on the public debt ostensibly to
combat inflations And so it goes.
We must recognize the fact more than ever in this highly
industrialized, interdependent age that one sector*of the economy cannot gain in the long run at the expense of another. Prosperous economic
conditions which will benefit all groups can be secured only if the requirements of the economy as a whoie are considered. Past experience has
demonstrated that the maintenance of stable and prosperous conditions
can not be assured by exclusive reliance upon the free play of market *
forces. The Government, as the collective agent of all of us, must be;,
in effect, the umpire between contending pressure groups, deciding important issues on the basis of what is in the interest of the country
as a whole. •It is a question of the degree of Governmental action and
intervention. For my part, I want as little as possible — but I want
enou$i to minimize destructive economic conflict, and protect .our national interests.
We have only to look at the world about, us today to realize
that there are, broadly speaking, three general types of economic
order — communism, socialism which, in greater' or lesser degree,
prevails in England and throu^iout western Europe, and the democratic?,
capitalism which wo want to preserve in this country. The challenge
to our system can and must be mot by providing a sustained high level
of production and employment. Otherwise, wo shall inevitably drift
towards more and more Government intervention and controls until our
system has been replaced by something akin to tho other two ~ not
because our people deliberately choose it but because they would be
likely to consider it the only alternative to widespread economic
distress and social disorder under our own system.
With most other inflation curbs gono, attention — and
criticism — will no doubt be centered more and more on fiscal' and
credit matters which affect, about the only area lefb where some, restraint may be ©xercised by the Government, Criticism has been aimed
particularly at three points* 1. At the Boserve System1s support of
the 7/8fths rate on Treasury certificates; 2. At the Board's fixing
of margin requirements at 100 per cent; and, 3* At continuation of
the Executive Order under which tho Board has regulated consumer credit.
Let mo discuss these three subjects briefly.

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

-31. Government Financing
Various bankers, dealers> insurance companies and others
have recommended an increase in short-term interest rates as a moans
of combating inflation* As the Board pointed out in its Annual Report for 1945* there is no reason to suppose that even if the shortterm rate wore increased to as high as l-l/L|th per cent, ifcrwould be
of value in combating inflationary dangers which have arisen from two
primary causes, neither of which would bo corrected by higher rates;
One cause is the volume'of monoy alroady created, which cannot be
rapidly reduced —- and in fact can only be continuously reduced by
having a budgetary cash surplus sufficient to continue the program
of debt retirement* This can come either from taxes or from the
sale on balance of nonmarketable bonds to the public, using the
proceeds to pay off bank-held debt* The other, and byfttrthe most
important basic cause^ is the insufficiency of production as yet in
relation to the existing money supply*
Since most of the sliort-term debt, outside of the Rosorvo
System, is held by the banks, a
*
n increase in the short-term rate would
add to bank earnings, which are still at very high levels due to Government bond holdings. It would add to the cost of carrying the public
debt# It would not reduce the existing money supply* It would add
nothing to production — the basic need of the, hour — nor would it
reduce consumption, • It would have no real bearing as an antiinflationary factor* We have been witnessing a rapid !rise in business,
consumer and mortgage credit*
It is hardly reasonable to suppose
that short-term rates on Government securities could be increased
sufficiently to deter this private borrowing.
As for increasing the short-term rate with the idea of discouraging further monetlzation of the debt by the bonks, it should be
emphasized that the Treasury's debt retirement program has been an effective means of accomplishing this desirable objective, and postponing need for more direct measures such as the Board outlined in its
report as possible alternatives for Congress to consider*
Jt has been argued that a flexible policy permitting some
increase in short-term rates would introduce uncertainties into the
market, which would discourage banks from shifting into longer-term
issues* The fact is that there could be very little uncertainty as
to short-term rates in view of the large volume of securities that
mature monthly* If a policy were adopted permitting short-term rates
to rise without setting an upper limit, the Treasury would hava difficulty in refunding its maturities, sinoe banks and other investors
would be likely to withhold funds awaiting even higher rates. The
question then is not^whether the short-term rate*should be pegged at
7/8 per cent or permitted to fluctuate up and down, but whether it
should be pegged at 1 por cent, 1-1/t* per cent or 1-1/2 per cent, or
some other level* There is no natural level. If short-term rates

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

-uwere permitted to r i s e sharply there would a.lso be pressure to drive
long-term r a t e s up. This would jeopardize the savings bond sales
program and cause wholesale redemptions.
There has been much discussion about tho issuance of longterm, 2-1/2 per cent marketable s e c u r i t i e s not e l i g i b l e for banks.
I t has been said t h a t such an issue would be a n t i - i n f l a t i o n a r y because i t would absorb savings which could be used to r e t i r e bank
debt. Some of "the arguments that might be made against putting out
such an issue at t h i s time are t h a t i t would increase bank c r e d i t
and insurance companies and savings banks would not only use accumulated funds for such investment but in addition would s e l l banke l i g i b l e issues to banks in order t o r a i s e funds with which t o subs c r i b e , or would borrow from banks• Such issues would not serve t o
increase savings ,of individuals who a r e the most important group from
the i n f l a t i o n standpoint. Series E, "F, and G Savings Bonds already
offer a t t r a c t i v e investment o u t l e t s t o t h i s group*.
I f i t should appear desirable in the future to provide an
a d d i t i o n a l investment outlet for funds of insurance companies and
savings banks i t would be preferable t o do t h i s through t h e offering of long-term nonmarketable s e c u r i t i e s , the yield on which would
be 2-1/2 per cent if held t o maturity. This would avoid the danger
of future additions t o long-term holdings of banks and i t would prot e c t the Treasury against investors who buy long-term s e c u r i t i e s for
short-term holding, thus getting 2-1/2 per c e n t , plus the premium as
maturity i s reached, on what in effect i s demand money so long as the
2-1/2 per cent r a t e is maintained. In my opinion t h i s long-term r a t e
should not be permitted to @?up, and, if need b e , t h e market must be
supported by the Federal Reserve* Otherwise tho cost of carrying the
public debt would be increased, many outstanding savings bonds y i e l d ing lower r a t e s would be cashed in and the funds invested in the
higher-yield market i s s u e s , and hearty losses would be incurred by
holders of outstanding market bonds. Confidence in the s t a b i l i t y of
the Government "bond market would vanish. If long-term nonmarketable
issues were offered, i t might be necessary to l i m i t subscriptions
under some formula which would provide only for the investment of accumulated funds and prevent switching from present holdings, p a r t i cularly t h e bank e l i g i b l o s .
I t has a l s o been argued t h a t the Treasury should refund
short-term s e c u r i t i e s into longer-term debt t o ease the refunding
problem and avoid the demand l i a b i l i t y on the Treasury. Compared t o
refunding in short-term i s s u e s , t h i s woulcj r e s u l t in an* increased
i n t e r e s t cost and in l e s s f l e x i b i l i t y to t h e Treasury in managing
tho debt. % Commercial bank holdings of longer-term s e c u r i t i e s and
commercial bank earnings, would be r e l a t i v e l y higher. As a matter

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

-5of fact, to the extent that private investors continue to expand their
holdings of E, F and G bonds, and the proceeds are applied to retiring
maturihg bank>held debt, the result is a refunding of short into lgngterm holdings. This accomplishes the desirable objective of shifting
the dobt out of the banks and into the hands of the general pfublic.
Also to the extent that the Treasury has a cash surplus — and it may
possibly be $1* to $6 billions in the first half of -19U7 —• it can
likewise be used largely to reduce short-tern). bank-»held debt.
With commercial tbanks holding 75' billion dollars of Government securities out of a total marketable debt of 182 billion, a
large amount of the debt should be in short-term issues. Monthly refundings create no problem. The argument that the -Treasury is now
faced with a large volume of demand obligations is not persuasive.
Undor present conditions, the entire debt is in effect a
demand obligation since the Federal Reserve assures the Treasury at
all times of a ready market for its offerings on a basis of 7/8f'fch$
per ceijt on the certificates and 2-1/2 per cent on the longest bonds.
With the public debt as large as it is today «
*
- twice the entire
private debt of the country — a free market is out of the question
if that is taken to mean an unmanaged, unsupported market. The public interest requires a stable marlcet for Government securities, and
this is the responsibility'of the Federal Reserve.
The Federal Reseiwe has worked, and will continue to work
in close cooperation with the Treasury. The public interest requires
the closest teamwork. The Federal Reserve is in ^complete agreement
with the Treasury's debt management program, as well as the general
fiscal policy, as outlined on several occasions by Secretary Snyder.
Beginning in March, as you know, it became possible not
only to meet the greatly reduced deficit without further borrowing,
but to enter upon a program of -debt retirement by drawing upon cash
accumulated balances. Sin6.e then, and including the projected retirement of 2 billion dollars for November 1, the Treasury redeemed for
cash close to 20 billions of securities. This debt retirement prqgram has been of considerable help in checking inflationary pressures on the monetary side.
As a result of the retirement program the enormous monetary
expansion which had been in process throughout the war years and which
raised the money supply from 39 billion dollars in I9l\p to 102 billions in February of this year has been halted and reversed.
By imposing a drain on bonk reserves, the retirement program has also exerted some brake upon further expansion of bonk
credit* While commercial loans- and consumer credit have recently

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

-6-

increased rapidly, security loans have decline^* and, as I have indicated, the retirement program has at least temporarily discouraged
further shifting by banks from short to medium and.long-term Government
securities.
While I would not like to see an increase in interest rates
at this time, neither would I like to see a further rate reduction*
The declixte in the price of longer-term issues since spring and the
resulting increase in yield has been altogether satisfactory as has
been the general stability of security prices.
There is no need for the issuance of additional long-term
marketable securities at this time, as the Government does not need
new money and, as I have indicated, expects to have a cash surplus.
If insurance companies, savings banks and other institutions have
surplus funds there is plenty of opportunity to invest in the existing long-term issues at present favorable prices and yields. Also
there is or will be an increasing opportunity to invest in mortgages
and other long-term investmentsf including World Bank securities.

2, Margin Requirements
in

I

>

'

•

I

*

i

i

•

1

Mil

The credit policy of the Federal Reserve System, in all its
aspects, should be adjusted to the general credit situation of the
country. We are not justified, for example, in fixing margin requirements exclusively by reference t
'
o the movement of stock prices, as some
people have suggested. The general credit situation must be the main
criterion, and "this in turn* is an integral part of the general business situation. When margin requirements were fixed at 100 per cent,
the general credit situation was highly inflationary because of the
immense volume'of purchasing power in the hands of investors and the
general public« Indeed, there is plenty of cash today to drive
stocks up very hieji, entirely without credit, if investors, let us
say, had more confidence in the prospect for profits in business
and industry and less uncertainty over the possibilities of further
wage-price maladjustments. It can hardly be contended, with reason,
that the credit gates should.be opened now in the market*in order to
finance new productive enterprise and private employment. There was
a very large volume of undigested offerings in the stock market,
only a part of which was for new'financing. Bub in ar^y case this is
not a time for encouraging new issues even for productive purposes because with the scarcity of materials and labor, it would only add to
the inflationary prossure.
This is not a one-way streetv When the situation changes,
and there is need to stimulate the use of credit for purchasing se*
curities, it will be time to consider lowering margin requirements.

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

-7This would be a time, as it seems to me, when there will be sufficient
supplies of materials and labor to justify the encouragement of new
issues of corporate securities, provided:there is at the same time a
prospect of declining production and declining employment« The ^time
to lower the margin requirements will be one at which, in contrast
to the present time, the effect will not be to add to inflationary
forces which are already strong but to combat deflationary forces
in the general economy*
The stock market, after a four-year rise which increased
values by 150 per cent, has now experienced a decline, bringing
prices down to the level at the end of the *war, or about. 20 per
cont below their high, point of last spring. I do not consider this
an alarming symptom* On the contrary, to the extent that this readjustment reflects a more sober appraisal of prospects and a lessening of the inflationary psychology, to the extent that it will
tend to slow down the timing of not absolutely urgent capital expenditures and inventory accumulations, it will contribute to a
balance in the economy.
One of the fortunate aspects, of the situation has boon the
lew level of stock market credit. Such credit now outstanding is in
the general neighborhood of 1 billion dollars, as compared with something like 3 billions at the prewar peak of stock prices in 1937 and
more than 12 billions at the peak in 1929• Without the existence of
stringent credit regulations the speculative upward movement of
prices would undoubtedly have gone much further and the subsequent
price decline with a concurrent forced liquidation of credit would
also have gone much further, thus making for greater instability.
Over the last J4O or 50 years, the upswings and downswings
of the stock market have been a decidedfyunstabilizing influence in
the national economy* It was in oi;der:to reduce this unstabilizing
influence, particularly as it is connected with the use of credit,
that Congress in 1934 vested in thq Reserve Board responsibility
for fixing margin'requirements on listed securities but not on unlisted securities; In the late 1920*s, when there were no Federal
margin requirements, .the upward movement in stock prices caused
thorn to increase by more than 200-per cent a.nd the sharp decline in
1929 was more:than twice as rapid as that which took place during
recent jnonth'S# The recent gyrations in the cotton market, which advancecl very rapidly last summer and then slumped by nearly 20 per
cent in a few days are an indication of wha.t can be expected in
speculative markets which are not subject to any effective control
over the use of credit,.

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

-.8Ono of the interesting consequences of the Board* s margin
requirements has been an almost uninterrupted reduction since the
middle of last year in the amount of .
.
s
i
; ock-market credit in use,
including tHe reduction during the period*when the market was advancing r* "which had never happened before. There were, to be sure,
some inequities a
r
i
d impeirfeotions in margin requirements as a regulatory instrument; including the failure of the law to cover nonlisted securities. Congress considered the question of v*iether unlisted securities should also be covered by th*e law but concluded
that it was not practical. Moreover, it is evident that control
of listed securities greatly influences the use. of credit and the
market for unlisted securities. On the whole, the use of margin
requirements can be viewed with satisfaction. Neither the long upswing that: culminated last May, nor the subsequent downswing
have gono.;~r,o the longths to which they would have gone if there had
been no Federal margin requirements..
The general public strongly approves of this regulation.
It is not to be expected that some of those in the brokerage or
security business who feel that their business is adversely affected
by regulation would agree with this viewpoint.

3»

Consumer Credit

As for consumed credit regulation, it was, as you may recall, the seventh point in the Governmentfs war-time program for
economic stabilization. The Reserve-Board did not seek the task
of administering this regulation. The ^quostion of whether there
should be some permanent legislation covering this important segment
of credit in *our economy is one for Congress to determine. The
Board, having had experiences with the war-time regulation aimed
specifically at the inflation target, would be remiss, I think, if
it failed to call the attention of Congress to the.need for making
a decision, one way or the-other.' I, for one, while I certainly
do not crave taking on this additional load, feel as the Board1 s
annual report stated that serious!consideration should be given by
Congress to the desirability of placing authority in some Governmental body to deal with the problem — for undoubtedly the expansion and contraction of this type.of credit'have greatly accentuated
economic' upswings and downturns in the past. There is a very strong
case to be'made for moderating theao excesses, so far as possible,
in the consumer credit field.
It could be accomplished, in my opinion, by focusing regulation primarily*on tho major durable floods customarily sold on the
installment plan. They compose the great dollar bulk of consumer

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

-9credit. It has been felt for some time by the Reserve Board that the
present regulation could be greatly improved administratively by
focusing it on the major durablos, eliminating the major part of
single payment loans and charge aocountsff^om its scope, together
with the soft goods and less important durables that4were included
when the regulation was originally drawn as,an anti-inflationary
device in war-time.
The Board for some time has been studying the advisability of thus revising the existing-regulation with a view to making
it administratively more workable. It is folt that this can bo done
without* - a material weakening of its effectiveness as a restraining influence at this time. INhen inflationary pressures have passed,
it would need to bo revised further, assuming that Congress'decides
to retain it as a poraianeht instrument of credit regulation.
It is important, of course, to boar in mind that th^se
selective controls, relating to listed .stocks and consumer credit,
can at best play only a relatively minor role in assuring stability in our economic life,* Likewise, monetary policy is even more
limited in its influence und^r present day conditions than over before. Overshadowing all of these asi^eots of Governmental poliqy
are national, fiscal and budgetary measures, together with*other
broad policies relating to business, labor and agriculture. Not
even the most ardent advocate ot laissez-faire would propose that
we abandon all Government regulations. It is, let mo say again,
a question of degroo — of doing through, tho mediunof Government
what needs to be done to contribute \o economic stability and
progress ~ and doing no more than that.
Since this is a banking group,, I have sought to cover
three specific questions in which you have a particular interest.
In conclusion, I would like to turn for a moment to the general
economic situation*as I see it as this timo. Speaking recently
at the National Outlook Conference of the Department of Agriculture,
I undertook to assess in*a general way the good and bad aspects
of our current situation. Without recounting that appraisal of
favorable and unfavorable factors, I will merely quote the conclusions that I think should be drawn from them*
ff

The situation calls for a budgetary surplus and continued debt retirement; Continued efforts should t
i
e made to reduce
public expenditures. Taxes should not be further reduced under
present conditions. It is desirable to increase tax revenues,
without increasing tax rates, by increasing ihe national income
as a result of greater productivity. Such an increase in the
national income, together with decreased Federal expenditures,
will bring about a budgetary surplus which will make possible tax
reductions later on.

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

-10-

"Speaking of the general credit situation, there is no reason
under present conditions for reducing .margin requirements on stock
market trading or for relaxing consumer credit restraints on durable
consumer gpods in short supply. Credit should be provided for productive purposes, but not for speculation* Nor is there justification
for increasing interest rates which would greatly complicate the Government1 s problem of managing the public debt and increase the cost
of carrying it, without the offsetting advantage of preventing inflation •
f,

At best, Government price or credit controls can only be
a stopgap, and fiscal policy can deal only with the money side of the
inflation problem. The overwhelmingly vital need now is for more work
and more goods — for increased productivity. Whether we are to have
a stable ecoriomic progress depends fundamentally now on the industrial
front, on labor and management, on ipcreasing output by increasing efficiency, eliminating bottlenecks and restrictive rulers and practices,
including those in the construction industry, and by avoiding strikes
and shutdowns. We all know that in our interdependent economy a strike
in one key industry paralyzes others — strikos oven by a comparatively
few workers in plants that supply othors can throw many thousands out
of work.
ff

Mord work and more <
=
;
o
o
d
s are the basic cures for inflation.
That is the only way in which labor .can keep the gains from the pay increases it has received. It is the only way to safeguard the purchasing power of all wages and savings# Purthei* wage increases for tho
same amount of work and output woi\ld servo only to intensify the upward
pressure on prices. Increased wages that result in inoroasod prices are
solf-dofeating. It will be far bettor to hold prices down and increase
productivity — to increase real wages — than to have further wage
and price'increases that would finally result in public resistance.
For this, in turn, would upset business calculations, and all longterm commitments, thereby precipitating a recession, the severity o
,
f
which would depend mainly on how long it would take to correct the
distortions and maladjustments. Only by keeping prices down and
maintaining the buying power of wages and savings can we have a
higher standard of living*
"We have all the tangiblo elements of sustained prosperity —
manpower, raw materials, money supply, coupled with a vast backlog of
needs and wants. Tho intangibles, still noeded, include self-restraint,
enlightened self-interest, the will and wisdom to translate the tangibles into a'lasting, higher standard of living."

Digitized for FRASER
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

